# Alexis Roussel

_**Pushing Back Against Regulatory Overreach: The Case of Bity vs. FINMA**_

_Bity.com is one of the oldest crypto brokers in Switzerland (selling XMR on its ATMs). In front of the Federal Administrative Tribunal, it is suing the Swiss regulator FINMA for a claimed illegal implementation of two FATF rules, the identification limit of 1000 CHF per month (1) and the Travel Rule (2)._

_In both cases, FINMA went beyond what FATF requested, and implemented this through a soft power mechanism that removes the need for the parliament to intervene._

_The talk will describe how FINMA operates and what is the status of the cases._

_This case is novel, because it is the first crowdfunded, transparent case against the regulator pushed by the crypto-community._

_All documents and the crowdfunding (also in XMR) are available here: https://btcpay.nymte.ch/apps/2aks2XSx8ogQFc2CPuKVben8KNcP/crowdfund_

[https://youtu.be/sT6VtNAOKqI](https://youtu.be/sT6VtNAOKqI)

---

_**Алексис:**_ So hello, everyone. So actually, it's going to be interesting, because it's the last talk I will be doing on this topic. Because it will be more like a retrospective. We have 20 minutes. It's short. And because basically, as I will explain to the end, now the case is in the hand of the judges. We just have to wait what the judge will say.

But, yeah, we name this talk "Pushing Back Against Regulatory Overreach" because basically what we see happening is there are laws about anti-money laundering and regulation in the financial world. Some of them are kind of okay where as a professional you want to play by the rules and everyone should play by the same rules. But what you see in crypto space is that these rules don't apply the same way just because it's crypto. And in addition of this, there's also a lot of bullying that is happening.

So I'll go over this. So Alex made a presentation of me. Indeed, I'm from the Nym team also, and we have a stand here. We have a workshop later today at 4:30 upstairs for Nym. It's about privacy also. Of course, that's my main theme in my whole career.

So who are the players around regulation in Switzerland and why this is a bit a weird system that is happening. So, there is an institution called FINMA in Switzerland, which is the Financial Market Authority. And they're the legal authority to actually supervise the anti-money laundering law. And they are helped by another type of organization, which is called Self-Regulatory Organization in Switzerland. And they take part of the work. So if you're a bank, you go to FINMA. But if you're a broker, like a Bitcoin broker or a cash exchange, you go to SRO. They're both defined in law, and they both build the same kind of rules. But they have a link together. FINMA is also supervising the SROs.

So Bity is a Bitcoin broker since 2014. And it's running ATM where you can buy Monero in Switzerland for cash. So it's pretty cool, since five years at least. But there's a lot of pressure against this. And so we don't have any direct relationship with FINMA. We have a relationship with SROs. But what happens is that this FATF, which you've heard of, the Financial Task Force, is actually putting up recommendations. And those recommendations goes into the FINMA without any legal process, and goes into SROs, and goes into the crypto world, the broker side, without having a way to response in a normal way. We cannot just push back. The legal process is not a democratic legal process.

So what happened? So in 2014 the Swiss government was super, super in advance. And that's why in Switzerland you have this kind of large crypto scene, is because they said in 2014: just follow the law, and it's going to be fine for crypto. Which means the law says for cash exchange it's a limit of 5,000 KYC-free transactions per transaction or per day. So that's pretty, pretty cool So we started up with the Bitcoin ATMs five thousand bucks in one go if you want, online payment five thousand bucks if you want without KYC - all good. In 2021 FATF says: "No, this is not five thousand. It's one thousand". And FINMA just say: "Okay, it's one thousand also for crypto in Switzerland", and they push this without any laws which have been changed. So they changed the law basically, because the law says 5,000. And then in the same year they implement this, indeed the same year.

At that time we didn't push back a lot because we go from 5,000 per day to 1,000 per day. It was kind of okay for like for a random person, it's 30,000 bucks for the whole month. I mean, that's okay, pretty okay. But then in 2023, what happens, they say: "Oh no, it's not 1,000 per day, it's 1,000 per month". And that changes the whole game, because you also have to be able to verify that through one month the same person is not buying more. And this is something that was not requested by FATF. It's something that FINMA came up by themselves. And they do this regularly, so there's an expression for it. It's called Swiss-Finish. If you type up Swiss-Finnish on the internet, you will find all the cases where FINMA will just take some rules that exist in the world and they will say: "Well, we'll make it just even better, right?"

So it's all a power play. It's all a power play. Switzerland is a hyper-democratic country except when it comes down to finance and that's why it creates a lot of tension. So there's a power play happening. So FINMA, which is mostly made out of bankers and lawyers who work for the banks and auditors who work for the banks, they come and go together, and also tiny detail from FINMA. It doesn't cost a cent to the federal government. They take their money only from the banks. So they don't have a national budget for FINMA, right? So they're like very autonomous in terms of budget, so they kind of can do whatever they want, they think.

So they control the SROs. But the SROs are self-regulatory organizations who are providing rules for the operators. But what happens is that there is this weird trick where FINMA is supervising the SROs and need to make sure that they are following the law. They cannot instruct them to do stuff. They just supervise them making sure that they follow the law. But there is like emails going on and there is pressure on the side which is covered by secrecy because FINMA is the only institution in Switzerland excluded from transparency law. That's a very convenient stuff to have. And they give instructions by email. And we got one of those emails, so we are suing them. And so whenever the rule comes here, you have no way to fight them because you cannot fight against a secret decision is suicide. You have to be aware of this, right? So, but now we got one and we are able to push this in front of the judge.

So what they violate. Yeah, they write a secret email, where they say that they implement the 1000 rule per month and suddenly the directives of the SROs are changing, so this is a public document, and we are forced to implement this rule. But when we claim back to the SROs saying: "But where does it come from?" They said: "Well, FINMA told us to do so, and we cannot show you the emails, the documentation, or why".

So here's what they have to implement this. So why did they decide one day to send an email saying: "Now it's going to be 1,000 per month"? Because of this article. So if some people are from Switzerland or Germany, you know that Blick is kind of like the trash news of Switzerland. So basically, FINMA is reacting based on just information in the trash news, which is not evidence-based material or research or whatever. They don't have any data in reality. They just read the article one day and they see that drug dealers are using the Bitcoin ATMs of the Trains, not ours, of the Trains, the Swiss train company to actually buy drugs. Okay.

What is also interesting is that in Switzerland there is a national risk assessment that every country has to do with FATF. And in 2024 it's done by the Swiss Federal Police. And basically what they say is that they don't have any data, and they should have data. So they're publicly admitting that they have no data. In 2019 or 18, there was another national risk assessment which were saying that as an introduction, they were saying: "We don't have any evidence of money laundering with crypto. But still the risk is so high we have to do something".

So right now we come into a situation and there's more and more reports coming out where they take decisions based on no evidence and the research material that comes out proves that anti-money laundering laws are not effective. You have less than 0.1% effectiveness, and now there's even a ratio which has appeared euro that is caught by the system, it cost 200 euros to get it. So it's the most inefficient policy since 20 years. It's going to blow up like the war against drugs, which have been shown as inefficient. That one will also at one point explode, have to explode by itself, because the cost for the society is too high. And we're part of like countering this movement, of course.

So what happened is that the industry from the start also engaged a lot. So we gave a lot of data to them, showing them the reality. And basically we were pointing out that what they're doing is actually wrong technically, but it's also wrong because they don't have any data. So at the end, they pushed and they admitted, yeah, they just don't like anonymous transactions. That's what they don't like, and they want to fight it, whatever the cost is. But we organized ourselves for a long time.

So Switzerland is a very transparent system, even though I told you that the FINMA has this secrecy for their own documentation, but they still have to publish some documents, and there is a consultation process. So what is interesting is that the story of the case actually started five years ago where we constantly took part in the consultation process. And what happened in the consultation process is that - so here, if you read German, you can see - it says: "Well, basically everyone said, no, it's a bad idea to implement this rule of 1,000 per month, but we do it anyway". Because crypto.

So here what we did. We don't have any relationship with FINMA. So we have to initiate, this is a legal process that if you want to attack someone in front of a court, you need something that they attack, you have a reason to attack, right? So we don't have any direct relationships, we know that they decide something it affects us, how do we prove this?

So the first thing we do is very simple. We wrote - that was one and a half years ago - we wrote a letter and say: "Hey, FINMA, we're Bity. Does this new rule that you pushed in your text, does this new rule applies to us? Yes or no?" And they were in front of a dilemma because they know they're not supposed to set up this rule. It's the SRO who needs to set up these rules, and the SRO should follow the law, and in this case they were bullied by the FINMA. So if they say "yes", then they agree that they did the wrong process. Instead of changing the law, they changed their internal stuff and they pushed the SROs to do this. If they say "no", then they agree that this law, that this rule doesn't apply to us, right? So they have this like weird moment where they cannot say "yes", they cannot say "no". Does this rule apply to us or not? So what did they say? They say: "We're not competent to say".

So let me rephrase it. So there is a new rule coming from FINMA. They make a public consultation process about this. And then suddenly it appears into other places like SRO. It applies to us. We ask them: "Are we supposed to apply this rule, which is really badly made?" And they say: "We're not competent to say". That's really weird for a legal for some of you who understand law here. You will find it a bit weird in a democracy.

So the first thing we did is we went for denial of justice: "Oh, you don't want to answer us? Okay, we'll make it". It's a denial of justice case. Just for the small story, at the beginning, they just didn't want to answer at all. And so we opened the first case in July, 2023. We opened the first case of completely denial of justice. And even before we got to the end, they sent us this decision, official decision, to say they're not competent. So we got this what is called "opposable decision".

So now we open a second case, which is ongoing, which says: "Okay, we think they're competent, and we give arguments for this". And I mean it does have impact on us. And there're two main things that they do wrong. The two main things are that they use a document, which is called the FINMA Ordinance, which is not the correct document for crypto brokers. So you have this structure where this FINMA Ordinance is meant for banks. And inside this, during the report, they talk about Bitcoin ATMs, and they talk about making this special rule just for Bitcoin ATMs, while no Bitcoin ATM provider in Switzerland is subject to that ordinance. So clearly in their reports they use the wrong tool for this.

And then the consultation process went wrong. And it went wrong for multiple things. So one we sent out, we participated, a lot of people participated, about 200 people, also individuals, and everyone said it was a bad idea. And they said: "No, we are doing it anyway". And that's not how a consultation process works, right? If everyone says: "It's a bad idea", maybe they should dig in, right?

And what they did, even worse, is that the basic rule was to say below 1000 francs per month, and then they changed it after the consultation process, and they specifically said: "Oh, the rule applies on anonymous payment systems". And so they implemented this without even going through a consultation process. And for you to understand is that in Switzerland until now there is no legal concept of privacy coin or anonymous payment system didn't exist. And they added this after a consultation process that went wrong. So it really points out to what they're really afraid.

So this is the case you can follow. Now two things about the case which are interesting and then is that we're fighting FINMA. ... around is secured around secrecy. So what we did is we did everything public. So you will find all the documents of the discussion between Bity, the SRO, the court case, everything there, completely transparent. And what is really interesting is that they never - I mean, maybe I did something wrong because I leave all the names of all the lawyers, the people working at FITMA, the phone numbers, everything is there, right? I could have done something wrong there. They never said anything to the judge. They kept saying: "We're not competent, we're not competent, we're not competent…"

So the second thing that we did, we did a crowdfunding. So now the crowdfunding is closed because we raised from the Swiss community almost 70K to fund this campaign. So right now we don't need any more money so it's closed. Maybe it will reopen at one point. But we came to the end of it, now we went through the whole process and it's in the hand of the judge to actually decide to do something.

Fun fact, Monero was one of the currency used for fundraising and we got some donations from the Monero community, so thank you.

And this is also something which they're not used to, right? Crowdfunded, open source case, again, the Swiss authority. They were so surprised that for the small stories that there was an article that you can still find, it's in German, but you can find where someone is like surprised that this case, that the consultation process went kind of wrong, and they thought it was even. They were suggesting that it was a foreign broker who was trying to make foreign influence to the Swiss community to push for this. And he could have just talked to the local community, to us, and asked them: "Hey, why did you do this?" We were all: "Swiss people fighting this and the whole industry is actually behind. Everything is transparent".

So follow the case. Hopefully we'll update with the results when they come. And now it's in the hand of the judge. Who knows how much time it will take? But yeah, thank you again for your support and follow the case.
