# Amir Taaki

_**Manifesto for a Dark Renaissance: Anonymity as Hard Offensive Power**_

_Overview of DarkFi:_
- _The coming war on crypto, and how it will undermine states_
- _Breakthroughs in cryptography and anonymous smart contracts_
- _DarkFi's plan to merge mine on Monero_
- _Overview of the ecosystem_

[https://youtu.be/GPe6ndIHArU](https://youtu.be/GPe6ndIHArU)

---

_**Amir:**_ Yeah, hi. So, there's been many martyrs of our movement. But I'm going to mention three names, which is JStark, who made the FGC-9, and he was murdered by the German police, which was 3D printed, semi-automatic. There's used by many rebel groups around the world, like the people in Myanmar fighting their authoritarian government. McAfee, who we all know. And one of the early pioneers who really promoted, who really kicked start cryptocurrency, which was Ross Ulbricht. And even this last week, we heard that he might be getting a presidential pardon. So pretty big news. So I dedicate my talk to these guys.

So my name is Amir Taaki, and I'm a free and open source software developer for over 20 years. And during a lot of that time with other hackers, we squatted buildings to found hack labs, which were centers where we worked on social and political technology, which is the kind of early precursors to hacker spaces. And I was also one of the first five Bitcoin developers. For most of my time in crypto development I focused on strong anonymity. I also worked for Catalan cooperative and was a professional poker player. In 2015, I joined the YPG where I fought on the frontline against ISIS. And later I left the YPG and I was in Syria for three years working on economic projects. So now enough about myself.

And in this talk, I'm going to talk about DarkFi. DarkFi is a L1 for anonymous smart contracts. And I'm very excited to show you what we have. We have limited time, but let's see how far we get.

So for some backstory, the DarkFi project started with a project called Dark Wallet in 2013. This is a project that I co-founded along with Cody Wilson, who is the inventor of the 3D printed gun, and also Vitalik, who left the project after a year to start Ethereum, with also a team of Spanish hackers. And you can actually see our initial announcement video on YouTube if you search for Dark Wallet. So I definitely recommend people to see that as a piece of history.

Yeah, no, everybody today in Bitcoin is like: "Well, I'm into guns and crypto anarchy." But back then, they were people coming and going to me: "Amir, you're an expert on developing software, but I'm an expert on marketing. Let me tell you how it's done. We need to make Bitcoin friendly for the regulators." And so I created this software which is the precursor to OpenBazaar. It was called Dark Market. There was actually a petition on Reddit to get me to rename the software, because it would scare away Bitcoin's mainstream acceptance. So you can actually see the response to that, which is the Dark Wallet Alpha video, which is also on YouTube. So that time the Bitcoin Foundation, they were attempting to capture Bitcoin. And a lot of, a lot of people would make you believe that the block size debate was a technical debate. It wasn't. It was really about kicking out Gavin Andersen and his cronies who were trying, they were trying to assert their power over the project. And so they, and I can talk more about this, but it's not my talk.

So also the name. So Dark Wallet was our response to that. And the name actually comes from a quote by the director of the FBI. He made a speech in 2013 about what he's called "The Going Dark Problem". So he says: "Unfortunately, the law hasn't kept pace with technology. And this disconnect has created a significant public safety problem. We call it "Going Dark". So that's the history behind Dark Wallet.

So there's a quote by Ernst Junger, he's a German philosopher, and he says: "The cult of crime is so characteristic of our times, its dimensions and extent are easily underestimated. And it would be no exaggeration to say that three quarters of the literature deals with criminals, with their deeds and their milieu, and that its appeal lies precisely there. This indicates how far the law has become dubious. People have a sense of being under foreign occupation. And in this relation, the criminal appears a kindred spirit."

Now it's not to say that, we're advocating for mafia, for criminality, but there is this all pervasive sense that we are colonized by the nation state. And that's why there is this kind of fascination or interest in all of our media with criminality, with law breaking, precisely because the law itself has become dubious. And we have to differentiate ourselves from criminals in our morals. We are forest rebels. The forest - we use it for cover and concealment to move around. We have a philosophy unlike mafias. But this label of the criminal - it's something that the state has put on us. And the true criminals, they are the true criminals. We all know about their pedo rings and I'm not gonna go into conspiracies, but even just the banal kind of everyday evil. For example, 2 million dead in Iraq. So when they come and they say that our software and our networks, which offer human freedom, are used by criminals, they're hypocrites, because they are the real criminals. And everybody that advocates for crypto regulation is doing an open and official provocation against liberty and sovereignty. And all of those who advocate for it are domestic enemies of the people and they must be absolutely opposed, because the right of people to keep and deploy cryptography should not be infringed.

So DarkFi, so all of these projects, which they're based off of the RegFi narrative, they advocate for regulation. And their whole thing is that as much as the regulators work with them. They can kind of get into the halls, and not really into the halls of power, but kind of on the doorstep, catching the crumbs from the master. They'll never really be in. And as soon as that power turns against them and says: "Hey, you're breaking the law", their entire narrative kind of crumbles down because they become criminals, whereas DarkFi draws power from that. That's why DarkFi is powerful. Because the more they crack down on DarkFi, the more it validates our thesis. The more that we say: "Look, this is the reality of the nation state of power unmasked. This is what they're really about." And there's a video of this on YouTube that we made. It's called "Lunarpunk and the Dark Side of the Cycle" by Rekt, R-E-K-T. You can find that.

And it's basically crypto now in a moral crisis and it's coming up to a kind of fork in the road where things bifurcate, where people have to pick a side. And the more the government's cracked down on crypto, the more it drives people into either of these two camps. And the RegFi just becomes bolted down. It becomes useless. It becomes unusable. You need to KYC so many restrictions. But the true crypto goes to the underground. So this is what we call DarkFi. This is why we call ourselves DarkFi.

And the more that they crack down, the more that we allow unhindered, free use of crypto technologies. And the more they see that they're powerless and the more that they become more restrictive. And so therefore this could be a very healthy thing for crypto because it allows crypto to come into its own being. A lot of people have said like: "Oh, all this stuff, all this software that we thought would be made in 2012", we were like: "Oh yeah, the crypto anarchy revolution just around the corner, just gonna happen, we can just relax, and it will unfold". Hasn't happened. We, it's kind of like we need to mobilize, we need to like move towards making that reality happen.

And all these other people that have come in, all these charlatans, opinion leaders, influencers, all the people that control the leaders of power. Because how does the system work? The system prints the money and then they put it in their funds, and the funds are like: "Oh yeah, I'll allocate a bit to crypto." And then they're staffed with a bunch of "yes men" and then crypto projects, they're like creating, they're like: "Oh yeah, we're going to change the world, we're going to unlock human freedom, human potential, but we're going to sell our tokens to these people who are getting money from the state essentially." And then those people like: "Oh yeah, you can't talk about any of that ideology stuff, it's not good." And that's why all the projects become cut, and then they've got too much money, and they hire HR people, and they like blow all their stuff. They don't create real value. So that's the like state that we're in. And maybe this apocalyptic extinction level event, which like destroys 90% of all those people that don't believe in anything, just there for the money essentially, and maybe they talk about ideology on Twitter, but as much as it like suckers you in the audience, those people are going like, then when the money dries up, it like: "Ok, I'm gonna go to AI now. That's the new thing", whatever bullshit.

So when you look at now how they're cracking down on crypto, Tornado Cash, Samurai, there's like a whole bunch of things you can discuss, but I'll discuss three of them, which is firstly - in the court proceedings you can see all their internal chats are public like and they're going like: "Oh, this guy he's obviously a ringleader, he's obviously a guy that's responsible for running this project and therefore he's responsible for this product, which is used for buying sweaters online", as an example, whatever. So, that's one thing, the communications. So, yeah, we see all these projects, they're like: "Yeah, we're anonymity, privacy, join our Discord" - put it in the trash, into the trash it goes.

Second, they have a DAO and they're like: "Oh yeah, we're in a DAO." And then they're like: "Oh, but you control, X amount, X percent of tokens, 50% of the tokens. This is like a public shareholder company. So you actually own this DAO, you own this treasury." So that's another reason they get sent to jail.

And thirdly, running infrastructure. So they're like: "Oh yeah, it's a wallet for privacy mixing but there's a guy running a server." So they're not really peer-to-peer. In the case of Tornado Cash, it's the limitation of Ethereum, just a little side note FYI, where Ethereum, if I do a mix with you, I need to pay the fee for the transaction. So how do I pay that fee? If I pay that fee, I dox myself. So you need some kind of thing called a "relayer". And that's what they were hosting, and that's what they got done on. So it's actually an architectural problem in ETH as well.

So in DarkFi now, so we are already, we don't use Discord or any of that. We use our own fully anonymous peer-to-peer chat. So all of the messages are unlinkable. So if I say something, then… and this is just like a daemon, but with an IRC client, joined to the front end. So if I say something, and then later someone goes: "Oh, you said that with that nickname", so I know it could anybody could say that I've got plausible deniability, because all the messages are completely unlinkable.

So, okay, you've got peer-to-peer network. How do you stop people spamming? We can use rate limit nullifiers, because you stake some money and every epoch, you can only send like one message, every epoch can be five seconds, for example, and if you send two messages in an epoch, people can do a kind of reverse Shamir secret sharing scheme, calculate your private key and slash you. So it's not that you're like paying for every single message, but to be able to post you need to stake. And if you spam the network, then you get slashed. And there's a fully anonymous way to do that. And so you can send messages, and all the messages are unlinkable.

And then people go: "Oh, well, if it's anonymous, how can you do about like trust and stuff like that?" Well, we have private groups, we have DMs, actually works very well on anonymous systems, in my opinion. And so we don't have to use Discord, we don't have to use any centralized, we don't have to run any centralized instance, like before we were using Matrix, we had 250 people in our room, it was lagging, it was slow, it's crappy software. Not only that, Matrix messages are linkable. You have an account, every time you send a message, they're linked. So, we have our own system that's fully anonymous. We also use it for tasks, issue tracking, so we don't need to use GitHub. So it's about minimizing your dependence on centralized infrastructure.

Just a side note, we didn't get around to making the Git backend yet, but we're using Codeberg, where you can make anonymous accounts with Tor. You can commit to the project fully anonymously as a developer. So you have a complete closed ecosystem that's completely anonymous. That's the first thing about the chats, like linking what people say to what they do. Originally, we wanted to speak very freely about the project, not have to hide in private groups, our fear of retribution. We want the community to be involved, so we were like, oh, we have to have a public space where we can be fully anonymous. I don't know any other software that exists that allow you to be fully anonymous like this, unlinkable messages. That's the first thing about implication.

The second thing about DAO membership, being a member of a DAO, having a stake - we made the world's and, as far as I know, the only fully anonymous DAO where all the members are completely anonymous, the tokens, the governance tokens, the actions, the treasury - everything about the DAO is completely anonymous, the voting, you can't link. It's just something that's encrypted on the blockchain. You can't see anything that's happening. And you can have a treasury there and you can manage it. So that's the second issue. They cannot sanction a DAO, they don't even know exists or a DAO that, they can't even see what's happening, how many people are in it or what's what. It's completely dark.

Thirdly, infrastructure. We need to create a software that's fully peer-to-peer.

_**Moderator:**_ So, there's a clock.

_**Amir:**_ Oh, two minutes? Oh, fuck. Okay, DarkFi will be merge mined with Monero. So I'll just shoot that out.

_**Moderator:**_ Amir, I'm not going to cut you off, man. Just do your talk.

_**Amir:**_ Ok. Node Explorer, other command line tools, you can see. Now, so now… Ok, I hate the web. I hate the web browser. I think the web was a mistake. I also hate UI frameworks. I think people are writing garbage software that looks ugly. It lags like when you open Signal. It's full of white space everywhere. You open these apps and they've got like massive buttons with like 20 pixel border around them, and I just can't use that. And I remember, and in the nineties, we were promised the future of tech that was so cool. And we never, we didn't get that. So I feel like I'm missing out. So we want to recreate that experience.

And so now instead of making the thing where people use MetaMask and they make a browser app, that's another thing hosted front ends. So now we're making our own platform where you can load plugins into it. And this is just so far, we've been working on the chat app and the wallet app, but it's like plugins into one application and it's written in OpenGL. So it's our own UI framework that we're creating, because then you have the full power and full flexibility to really create experience, this sci-fi and magical with all the security properties that you want and allowing people to download the apps peer-to-peer self-hosted without having, without putting anybody in the way of liability.

So yeah, as DarkFi what we're really shooting for is to expand the design space of anonymity and possibility for users. Right now there's this kind of meme I've heard a few times: "privacy is normal". And he's like, no privacy, that's saying "privacy is normies" essentially. It's like: "no privacy is exceptional". It's like special. It's like something valuable. And this is also part of the thing with Monero as well. They're like: "privacy is cool." That's what we're rally because privacy until now hasn't… like everybody's like: "Oh, why isn't it taken off as a narrative?" It's like, because, we haven't, we haven't rallied people in terms of like the memetic complex.

So in terms of… I almost finished. So I'll just say that for developers as well, we're providing you a comfy home. So join our chat, come work on something meaningful, have the opportunity to participate in the upside of a project early, let's change this thing. So thank you.

_**Moderator:**_ So what I didn't catch in that was actually a timeline for the blockchain, for the layer one deployment.

_**Amir:**_ Yeah, we're now releasing the final testnet, and then we want to run that for a few months, and then we want to release the mainnet. But… God willing.

_**Moderator:**_ And it's going to be just expand a little bit more on the logic of merge mining with Monero, because I think that's important technically for this room?

_**Amir:**_ Yeah I think, I mean I'm not the consensus guy, but part of it is like - ok originally we were using proof of stake just because it's like more efficient but then we were looking at proof of stake, and we were like, ok, but it's not anonymous. So we made an anonymous version of proof of stake, which was based off of a scheme actually made by IOHK called Ouroboros Crypsinus.

But then we started getting into really difficult question about distribution, because proof of stake can be quite oligarchic. So then we were like: "Ok, well, we have to at least in the initial phase use proof of work as a bootstrap mechanism." But when you start to get into proof of work, then you have a security issue. So then we were just like: "Ok, it makes sense to do some kind of merge mining to gain the security from another chain." And we were like: "Well, Monero is like a natural fit. It's the closest community to us really." So it's also kind of like, and a lot was interesting about Monero community is the miners. They're not really operating a profit. And it's very distributed. And generally in token allocation, you wanna have a very even distribution. So that's very good in terms of distribution question. And also it's kind of like an airdrop to the Monero community as well. So I think actually Seth proposed that. I don't know if he's here, but anyway.

_**Moderator:**_ Seth's not here. Do we have any questions for Amir, please?
