# Andrea

_**Privacy as a Kantian-Misesian A Priori Condition for the Preservation of Property Rights**_

_This presentation analyzes the relation between the philosophical notion of privacy, its practical implementation in the domain of cryptocurrencies, and the Western regulatory financial environment. A libertarian (anarcho-capitalist, agorist) perspective is adopted._

_The ability of governments to extract resources from the economy depends on their ability to surveil it: property that is not seen by authorities cannot be taxed. Privacy-preserving cryptocurrencies such as Monero pose a special danger to the state because they allow buyers and sellers to interact directly without relying on regulated financial institutions, thus bolstering black (free) markets. It comes as no surprise, then, that regulators are cracking down on privacy-centric crypto projects, as shown by the Tornado Cash saga._

_Oddly enough, the clamp down on Tornado Cash elicited only a mild response in the cryptocurrency ecosystem. For example, the focus of proposals like Privacy Pools is on finding a practical equilibrium between the preservation of privacy and regulatory compliance without challenging the ability of the state to define the rules of the game. In order to understand why this appeasement strategy cannot work, a proper philosophical debate on the nature of privacy needs to be carried out._

_The main objective of this presentation is to investigate what kind of theoretical notion privacy is. Utilitarianism, privacy as a natural right, and privacy as a Kantian-Misesian a priori condition for the preservation of property rights are analyzed. Firstly, it is shown that utilitarian (relativistic) approaches do not work because they end up outsourcing the definition of privacy to the government; the powerful, not utilitarians, get to define the costs and benefits of privacy and surveillance. Secondly, the theory of privacy as a natural right is interesting because it does not depend on the arbitrary wishes of politicians and bureaucrats, but it is discarded because it is not compatible with libertarian reductionism, which correctly holds that property is the only natural right. Moreover, privacy is more of a fight than a right. Thirdly, the main proposal of this presentation is to understand privacy as a Kantian-Misesian a priori condition for the preservation of property: that privacy is required to safeguard property is an a priori truth that does not depend on empirical circumstances. This proposal is coherent with libertarian reductionism because privacy is not interpreted as a natural right; in parallel, it is superior to utilitarianism because the a priori status of privacy protects it from human arbitrariness. While the origin of a priori notions is not empirical, their use is: privacy cannot but impact how the acting man protects real-world property and interacts with fellow human beings. The Kantian-Misesian approach leads to the rejection of self-defeating appeasement strategies and to the adoption of a much more effective adversarial mindset._

[https://youtu.be/0UXgI7fHukc](https://youtu.be/0UXgI7fHukc)

---

_**Andrea:**_ So first of all, thanks for having me. I mean, even at this late hour. And thanks, of course, to the organizers for the amazing job that they are doing in organizing this conference.

Today, I will be going to talk about the philosophical notion of privacy. So a very quick summary about the talk. The talk is divided into two parts. Basically, the first part is a very, very quick introduction about the regulatory attacks that we are witnessing nowadays against privacy preserving tools. And then I will move to the second part of the talk, which is about philosophy. And the main question of the talk is what kind of notion privacy is. Of course, to be sure, I just assume here that we all agree on a basic definition of privacy that states that privacy is the condition of being invisible by default to potential adversaries. If you don't like this definition, you can just change it. It's not important. The main question is what kind of notion privacy is? And I will discuss in particular three kinds of solutions to this question. First, I will discuss a utilitarian framework. Second, I will discuss the theory that privacy is a natural right. And then I will propose my favorite answer to the question, that is a Kantian and Misesian view of privacy.

Of course, in this area, in this talk I will touch on different areas of research, starting from cryptocurrency regulations and also the technical implementation of privacy. But again, the main issue here is philosophical.

Of course, between the two main areas of research that is cryptocurrency regulations on the one hand and philosophy on the other, there is a strict relationship in the sense that, of course, if we aim to defend ourselves against privacy, against regulatory attacks, we must know what kind of notion privacy is and we must know what we are defending. So this is the link between the two parts.

So let's start with a very brief introduction. And first thing that we must understand is that there is a fundamental incompatibility between privacy on the one hand and the existence of the state on the other. This is because of two reasons, basically. First of all, privacy allows people to transact freely, to transact without being forced to buy a service that people don't want to buy. So basically the fiat monetary system is a fiat surveillance system, and surveillance is designed in order to extract money from every economic transaction. And privacy is an interest exactly to this very existential power to the state, the power of course of taxation.

The second issue of course is that privacy allows through peer-to-peer interactions without unwanted third-party observers. And of course, this harms the economic interests of powerful people like intermediaries, banks, and exchanges, and so on and so forth, which of course have a lot of economic interest in favoring, on the other hand, the intermediation of every economic transactions.

And because of these two reasons, we see nowadays that privacy is under attack, and we see it in a lot of different ways. First, most important of course for our purposes is the pressures exerted by regulators to address Monero from major exchanges, but also the arrest of privacy developers like Tornado Cash and the Samourai Wallet developers.

All these regulatory attacks stem from the actions and the framework provided by the Financial Action Task Force, which is called the risk-based approach. Basically, their idea is that privacy is a risk by default. And given that privacy is a risk, it is somehow to be mitigated. And all the regulations are designed in order to mitigate the risk of privacy. And this is true, for example, for KYC, for anti-money laundering legislation, and so on and so forth.

Also very important to understand, as Articmine explained very well yesterday, is that there are a lot of private actors that are going to profit, that want to profit from offering surveillance services to the government. And the first, of course, these private actors are blockchain surveillance companies, of course. So it is a very complicated picture. We must understand that we are under attack.

So the question becomes: how can we defend ourselves successfully against this attack? Of course, I don't have an answer to this question because it is a very complicated question, but I can say pretty safely that basically if we want to defend privacy, we must understand what kind of theoretical notion privacy is. And we must reflect philosophically on this topic in order to do our work when it comes to implementing privacy solutions. So there is a huge philosophical question here that must be debated.

So the question of this talk, again, is what kind of notion privacy is? I will just start by discussing the first and the most common framework and the most common answer to this question. The framework is the framework of utilitarianism. Basically, there are a lot of variants of utilitarian philosophy and the common idea to all these variants is that privacy is just something that is just an empirical notion. It is just something that depends on empirical circumstances. And therefore, it may change according to the different circumstances that we live in.

For example, a variant of utilitarianism is a positivistic or legalistic approach where privacy is defined by the government, by the state, and of course, the definition of privacy changes between the US, for example, and the EU, or China, or whatever country.

Another variant of utilitarianism is the idea that privacy is just a matter of cost and benefits, and therefore, we must understand what is the price that we must pay in order to gain privacy and the benefits that stem from them or the idea that privacy is a spectrum, and so on and so forth. All these are utilitarian approaches in the sense that they provide just an empirical understanding of privacy. Privacy depends on some particular set of circumstances.

Of course, there are huge problems with this utilitarian framework. I will just explain some of them. The first issue is that utilitarians, especially utilitarians in the cryptocurrency community, are never going to define what is useful and what is not when it comes to privacy. Basically, idea of utilitarians is that we can just have a fair discussion about the cost and benefits of privacy, but in the real world there are powerful actors, both economically speaking and politically speaking, that will set the tone when it comes to any privacy discussion. And so what is useful and what is not will be decided by powerful people and not by the privacy community. So there are imbalances of power that we must take into account.

Another issue with utilitarianism is that utilitarians cannot really answer the question why the government shouldn't ask for more privacy violations. After all, if privacy is understood as just a risk, then we want to mitigate that risk as much as possible. So for example, nowadays the government are just pushing for banning Monero from, for delisting Monero from centralized exchanges. But why shouldn't the government ask for delisting Bitcoin, for example, from centralized exchanges? Because, by the way, Bitcoin provides pseudonymity and pseudonymity can be a risk if privacy is understood as a risk. And why should the government ask for outlawing physical fiat cash, which is, by the way, exactly what they are doing. So utilitarians, given that they don't have a strong notion of privacy, cannot really provide an answer to this question.

Another point, a very important point, is that there is this argument in the crypto community that we can argue in a fair way with the government when it comes to the relation between privacy on the one hand and crime on the other. Often privacy advocates state that well, just 1 % of crypto users, of Monero users, use Monero for nefarious purposes, but 99 % of crypto users are honest people and they should not be harassed by law enforcement agencies. Well, this kind of argument really doesn't work, and it doesn't work because it is completely off mark. The government doesn't care about tackling crime. By the way, governments are the biggest criminal organization on earth. So how can we expect a criminal organization to tackle crime? This is a contradiction in terms. But most importantly, we must understand that these kinds of regulations are designed not to tackle crime but to surveil the people and to extract economic value from every economic transactions. And so the government know very well that KYC legislation doesn't work, that financial crimes happen in the vast majority of cases in regulated financial institutions, and still they don't care. And they don't care because the purpose of these regulations is just to develop a surveillance system.

So basically the main problem of utilitarianism is that utilitarians don't provide any strong notion of privacy and they just delegated this task to the government and they just hope that the government will not attack them. Utilitarians tout themselves as practical philosophers, as philosophers that do not care so much about abstract philosophical notion, but in practice it doesn't work and utilitarianism gives just more power to the state because it delegates to it the ability to define what privacy is. It provides less privacy to individual users because basically we as users are harassed continuously by these kind of regulations. And of course it maintains the privacy of criminals because previous criminals just doesn't care about the cost and benefits analysis of the state or of utilitarians.

So we must find a different framework in order to understand what privacy is. And of course, the most important competitor of utilitarian approaches is the natural law view of privacy, according to which privacy is just a natural right. And this theory has a huge advantage over a utilitarian approach. The huge advantage is that privacy is understood as an absolute notion, a universal notion, a notion that is not subject to the arbitrariness of any human being. If privacy is something natural, then it means that it is not in the hands of politicians, of bureaucrats, or of a single person to define what it is and what it is not.

So this is the huge advantage of natural law view of privacy. However, even this theory has its own shortcomings. The first one is that it runs contrary to so-called libertarian reductionism, which is the theory that there exists only one natural right, which is, of course, the right to property. So there are some arguments provided, for example, by Rothbard, which is one of the most important libertarian philosophers, who state that, basically, claiming the right to privacy is something wrong, especially when the right to privacy aims to surpass the right to property. So for example, here, the reasoning is very similar to the reason why libertarians do not like intellectual property. So for example, take for example transparent blockchains. So of course every external party can observe what is going on chain, right? But if we claim that we have the right to financial privacy and we want to stop other people to look to what's going on chain, then we are violating their property rights because basically these are just public information and everyone can use their mind and their body to observe what happens in the world. So no right to privacy can ever surpass the right to property.

Also, the natural law view of privacy has a second shortcoming in the sense that it's a bit static and in the sense that it doesn't take into account the fact that privacy is something that we must fight for. And therefore we should provide some practical strategy in order to defend privacy in the real world because as we can see nowadays, privacy is often under attack.

So my proposal is to try to define a different paradigm of privacy that allows to keep the advantage of natural law view of privacy, that provides a universal understanding of privacy, while at the same time avoiding its shortcomings. This framework is the Kantian-Misesian framework that gives the title, of course, to the talk. Of course, the inspiration is Kantian philosophy, Kantian transcendental philosophy, whose main purpose is to find so-called a priori conditions. A priori means universal, necessarily non-empirical conditions that makes human knowledge possible. For example, in Kantian philosophy, the concept of causality is something that we must use in order to understand the world. The concept of causality per se does not depend on empirical circumstances. Its origin is a priori, but however, it can be used empirically in order to understand the world.

The claim here is that privacy is something similar. That is, privacy is an a priori condition not to gain knowledge about the world, but to preserve property rights. So it has both an a priori dimension, because it doesn't depend on empirical circumstances, but it allows us to protect privacy in the real world.

So the question now becomes, how can we ascertain whether a proposition is a priori or not? The proposition here is that privacy is an a priori condition for the preservation of property right. We need a criterion in order to ascertain whether this the case, whether this proposition is effectively a priori. Here I use a test that is provided by Mises. You can see it in this passage. I'm not going to read it because of time. But basically, this is a threefold test, and I will explain the three requirements that must be met in order for a proposition to be a priori.

So first of all, the first requirement is that if privacy is an a priori condition for the preservation of property right, the opposite of this proposition is unthinkable and is a nonsense to the mind. So the question becomes: can we effectively preserve property without privacy? And the answer obviously is not. Of course, the short answer is not because actually we should develop an ontology of privacy, we should discuss different domain where property can be maintained. For example, property in the physical world is one thing, property of information is another thing, but the idea is that without privacy, we cannot have property. Privacy is at least a necessary condition for the preservation of property. For example, in the domain of cryptocurrencies, just try what happens when you share your private keys, the private keys of your wallet. Of course, sharing the private keys of your wallet means losing the property of the coins that are in the world. So it is unthinkable to preserve privacy without maintaining a preserved property without maintaining some level of privacy.

Of course, the practical implementation of privacy is an empirical issue. There are different ways to implement privacy in the real world. However, the necessity of privacy to safeguard property is an a priori truth.

The second requirement is that an a priori condition must be involved in all the problems concerned with a particular problem. And in this case, we can say that privacy is necessarily implied in all our mental approach to all the problems concerned with the preservation of property right. This means basically that when we think about the preservation of property, we must necessarily think also about how we can preserve the privacy of that property. That means we have to develop some kind of strategy, implicit or explicit, that allow us to maintain privacy effectively. Of course, which kind of privacy we develop is just an empirical issue, but the fact that there must be and some sort of strategy in order to preserve property is a priori truth. And I think that again, we as cryptocurrency holders, we well understand that we know that in order to preserve the property of our coins, we must think about, I don't know, running a full node or using another wallet or developing some kind of strategy in order to maintain property.

The third requirement is that, basically, a priori truths are not empirical truths, which means that a priori truths cannot be disproved by empirical facts. For example, of course, in the case of liberty, the empirical fact that slavery exists does not disprove that everyone has a right to own his body and his mind. And the same goes for privacy. Of course, privacy is violated daily in the real world, but still it remains true that privacy is in a priori condition for the preservation of property rights. And indeed, this is what happens in the sense that we use daily privacy in order to preserve property, in order to interact peacefully and in a trustworthy way with other people. I mean, privacy is something that is universal, and it cannot be falsified by empirical statement, and it is useful in our daily life.

So the main point of this talk basically is just that when it comes to implementing privacy, we cannot avoid discussing also the philosophy that is behind our practical implementation of privacy. And it matters a lot whether we subscribe to a utilitarian approach on the one hand or to a universal approach as, example, the Kantian one, on the other.

So for example, think about the different approaches that utilitarians or Kantians may adopt when it comes to taxes, sanctions, black markets, and so on and so forth. If you are a utilitarian and think that privacy is just an empirical issue, it is something that is useful in some cases and dangerous in other cases, you will just tend to adopt some sort of appeasement strategies. You will focus on white market, on the collaboration on the state when it comes to taxes and sanctions and so on and so forth. On the other hand, if you are a natural law theorist or a better Kantian or a Misesian theorist, you will think that given that privacy is something that is a priority, that is a universal requirement to the preservation of property, it must be defended in all these cases. So you will tend to oppose taxes. You will tend to say that an Iranian man who wants to transact with a North Korean man should be free to do so even if their governments are tyrannical governments. The people of Iran are not the government of Iran, so why are the government harassed by Western regulation?

And so, just the last point on this, of course, this is not to deny that privacy is related to crime. The relation between privacy and crime is very clear also to the father of the cypherpunk movement, as for example, Timothy May, who states very clearly that the development of privacy technology will bring more crime in the world. Still, even if this is the case, we should not stop to find ways to implement privacy. Why? Because privacy is a truly neutral concept and instrument. It can be used, of course, by everyone because it's part of human nature, which means that privacy can be used by good people on the one hand, but also by bad people, both private and public institutions on the other.

And in this regard, I'd like an analogy with the John Wick film series. I don't know if you are familiar with the Continental Hotel. I'd to think I learned to think about privacy as something similar to the continental hotel, where different kind of people, even different criminal organization, can just chill, so to speak, in the continental hotel, more or less, without the threat of violence, basically. So it is a neutral instrument that allow to interact even the most dangerous enemies.

So in the end, the question is not how should we stop criminal from using privacy we want, criminal will use privacy because privacy is something universal that is embedded in human nature. The true question is how can we leverage our natural tendency to privacy in order to preserve our property rights? And this is the question that we should ask and this is why I think the Monero community is developing the tools that it is developing.

That's it. Thank you very much.
