# Anhdres

_**The Monero Country**_

_We build all our systems under the assumption of opting-out of current countries, but if they are everywhere, covering every inch of available land, then where are we opting-out to?_

_Let's take a sincere look at what we already have and all the tools we're still missing. Then embrace the unavoidable advantages of economies of scale while setting up better private foundations, built new systems on top of them, and become the founding fathers and mothers of a better future._

[https://youtu.be/fXkNV35alEs](https://youtu.be/fXkNV35alEs)

---

_**Anhdres:**_ So I'm gonna be talking about the Monero country this time. My hope - spoiler alert, probably I will end up the talk with more questions than answers. But my hope is that this talk is like all those things that we do, especially in the Monero community, that we don't know who's gonna reach them, but we just put it out there by chance, just like when we play pool, we aim for some specific hole but we never actually made it. But if we do it hard enough, maybe sometimes we hit the right spot and we make it like it was orientation all along. So hopefully this talk is like this, and any of you or some of you get inspired by some of the questions and can think of some of the answers.

So basically what I see all of the time in the Monero community is a lot of talk and progress, and work towards opting out. Some of you even have like an "opt out" t-shirts over there. I have one as well. And it's all well and good. It makes sense to try to opt out of a system, the system we have today everywhere in the world. It kind of looks like a year, like a super high world citadel with CCTV cameras and basically all the people looks like NPCs doing like this and not complaining much about how the life is nowadays. But I totally get and I think everybody here will get what it makes sense to try to opt out. My question with this talk is: okay, that's all fine and good but where are we going to opt out to? And I see way less… maybe there are some discussions about way less proposals about what are we opting out to.

And if we opt out and we are successful at opting out and we build something on the other side of the citadel, how is it to look like? Right? Because there are many choices - is it going to look like a hippie commune - we are all sharing everything? More like Burning Man - it's like chaos and we do stuff, party all night long. It's like a hyper dense, go long city, cypherpunk or something? Or we are just like… at least I think many people try to imply - super free, because we live by ourselves in the middle of nowhere and have rifles and I prepare for the apocalypse which may never come. But in the meantime we're having a lousy quality of life, I think. And I don't want to start learning how to plant my own potatoes or something.

So I think we can do better. Maybe I'm naive, I'm totally naive. I think that is better to be positive than negative. Eventually the negative people were right, but without the positive people we never do anything anyway.

For that we're gonna need both of these guys. We have a lot of disruptors here. Maybe Monero community is a bit special, because we have many of the constructors as well. But usually the disruptors are the ones that get most of the press. They are way cooler. It looks way nicer to just break things and it's more badass to say: "Oh, I got out of the system or whatever". And it's kind of boring and a bit lame to say: "Oh, I had this idea to build something". But we need both of them for our Monero country to exist.

These are the two assumptions that I will be using for the rest of what I'm proposing. We need both of these things for it to succeed. I mean, we need to accept that most people are good. I'll put an asterisk on that and say: okay, under the right circumstances, but most people are good, and that we tend to make groups all the time. So some people find me… especially on the second one, believe it or not, it's like: "No, we can all be by ourselves". Yeah, yeah, good luck. It's not going to happen.

On the first one, on the one that most people are good, we have many, many examples of cheap and easy tests that you can do when you leave a wallet on the floor, and you leave the contact information of the owner. Believe it or not, most people, even if there's money in there, return the wallet, right? And they didn't have to. So there have been many experiments like that. It's been proven once and again and again that if we have enough to eat, we are generous and we return the items that don't belong to us.

But I'm more interested in these kind of experiments, like the Ultimatum game, probably some of you know it, because it's on the fringes of the incentives of people behaving properly, cooperative or in an aggressive way, that we find some ideas for our Monero country and the laws that we will need to develop for that country to work in a nice way.

In this experiment, for example, you have two participants, A and B, you give an amount of money to A and you say: "Propose a split of this money to B. If B thinks it's fair, they both get their share. If B rejects, nobody gets the money". So, of course, the solution to that problem is never 50/50. A tries to get as much money of the trader as possible without insulting B. In societies right now, in the citadel that I was talking about, I see these kind of ideas all the time, right? And they keep pushing, pushing, pushing, A keeps pushing, pushing the barrier so much until B says: "Oh, fuck you", right? You're not getting anything, not me, not you, not anything, and they stop cooperating. So these kind of simple exercises, I think we have to keep in mind all the time when we are designing rules of interaction between what will be the citizens of a Monero country.

We are super used to being very adversarial when we design crypto systems, because we cannot allow for any participant or any risk of losing funds, because we lose something and it all breaks down. Societies have a bit more leeway so I think we can learn while riding the bike so to speak.

When it comes to grouping, of course being in groups is super easy, makes us safer. The thing that people like the most is to feel safe, and is to feel safe. We are safer in groups, especially if we are the group that is bigger than the other group, so we can kill the other group, basically. That's the way that it works.

But it's also because it's nicer. We are social creatures, we like to be each other's. We make conference just for that reason. We call our own like talking online. Anyways, no, we make a conference, we fly to Prague. We are gonna make groups.

So there is a number, the Dunbar number that has been proven with many points of data, that is around 150 citizens, mean 150 people, when you go over that threshold, basically trust breaks, because that's like the biological limit of how many connections between people we can keep in our brains at the same time, right? We can claim to know 150 people about and the relationship between them, so trust systems work up to that. And after that, we kind of need to develop systems, rules and institutions so that we don't basically lead each other all the time. So I think if you pay attention, like MoneroKon is roughly in that number and we leave backpacks laying around, it's all good and fine. I think Monero as a whole, community is kind of in that threshold as well. Of course, are like thousands of us, but you start to see the cracks around if we don't develop strong rules of engagement.

This is the beginning of a to-do list. Of course, it will take weeks to do something like that. Let's play for 11 minutes that we are going to decide is a good idea, let's try to make a Monero country.

First, we need to decide who gets to be a Monero citizen. In my opinion, you can be a Monero. And you can too, and you can too. I think having Monero is not enough because you can very well have Monero. The whole point to have Monero is that it's permissionless. So even people against Monero can hold Monero. So holding Monero is not enough as a condition to be a Monero citizen.

I think the way that the world works right now, I mean, you're basically a citizen of somewhere because you were born in that part of the world, particular region or physical location, or you came out of the right mother so to speak, one of two of them or a combination of both. We don't have that privilege to start now to claim who gets to be a Monero citizen. So we are going to opt in being a Monero citizen, right?

And we need something in common. We don't have religion in common. We don't have a physical space in common. The things that we have in common is basically our ideas, our beliefs, our core beliefs. To me, these are the three that I could think of that I don't think they are really contested in the Monero community. We all kind of agree that these three are important. Freedom, what I mean by freedom is that you are your ability to choose the design of the life that is going to make you happier. The privacy to me is a total requisite so you can exercise that freedom without even like punishment but also judgment so you don't modify your behavior yourself. My previous talk was more about that. And decentralization of course so nobody is in charge and can change the other two rules at will.

So to me I'm a real citizen and of course there are many other things around those core beliefs. Maybe some that there are still not like total consensus now, but we need people to write about them, to think about it, to speak about them and see what happens, because I'm sure that we can get more than those three. The more that we get, the stronger that we are going to be.

The second decision is that we need land or not. It's a country. Let's play with me a little bit. Of course, we are kind of like a micronation, right, at this stage. We know many micronations in the history. This is sea land which is an offshore platform, if nobody knows this. It's a Liberland, which is a no man's land next to Croatia, Molossia, it's a ranch in the US and many. It's super fun to learn about micronations. But the thing that they have in common is that basically nobody takes them for serious, right? It's like: "Ah, let's pretend, yeah, we are a nation". Sure, sure, go you and your nation. And I think that if you want to ensure, let's play this game, but seriously, we want people to have a better life inside the country that they have outside of it. So let's try to get recognized by the other states and other nations and to do that they have to pay attention to us. So I say no to land, I leave it not at this stage because we are centralized again, we have just one attack vector. We are never going to agree on which is the best land to be in. I don't like gold, some people like gold for example. I like to have dinner at 10pm. We are never going to agree. So, let's forget about land, right?

But there are two micronations that recognised by the UN and they have treaties and they part of important stuff that people take care of. One of them has land, which is the Vatican. We are not going to be the Vatican. We are not old enough, we are not rich enough. We don't need a religion either. What? But there is another one that I... until a couple of months ago I didn't know which one the only... somebody of you knows who is the other one? This guys. WTF, right? Okay, these guys are actually a nation recognized by the UN. They are part of the Olympic Committee. They are part of the International Post something. They are part of the Red Cross. They're basically a country and they don't have any territory. It's the only case that I could find. These guys have been around a thousand years. So we are ten and counting, right? Yeah, but they say that you shouldn't play a plant. You plant the seeds of the trees that your kids are going to sit below, right? So let's do that. Let's play. We are not going to beat them on the fashion design. Yeah, we much more in... Look at this, so badass. But yeah, he's been around like a thousand years, right? And the whole thing started. Why are they recognized? Because basically they were doctors and the first crusades... First crusades... not the last crusade, the one we need in a chance, the first crusades. They helped all the knights going to the Holy Land. So afterwards they said: "These guys are cool". They started in Malta and then now they don't even have Malta. Malta is another thing, but they keep the name. So I think this is a good present for us to be, if they can do it, we can do it as well. Let's be optimist.

And this is another precedent that I think we could, how do we get to be the order of Malta? Let's take the Masons, not the Illuminati, but the Masons, right? They were around like 300 years ago, 200 years ago. They were, by the moment, very advanced. They have many crazy ideas, right? Like, I don't know, people being equal and respecting each other's religions, for example. So in the moment, they look like crazy. They're organizing themselves. And they made something very intelligent, is that they permeate and they got into every single place of power they could. They made a lot of revolutions and they end up with many of the democratic countries that we have now, which have a lot of failures but they're way better than having kings and monarchies in my opinion. So let's not stop there, of course, let's be the mason of the new century or something. Again, the bar is set pretty high for how cool they look, right? But we are doing well for ourselves. That's our present to get closer to be the new Malta.

And this is a personal experience of mine. I think I'm right. The Partido de la Red, it means the net party, was a political party in Buenos Aires in 2013. They run for the legislature of the city of Buenos Aires. The thing working like that, this, kind of like if you make a Reddit clone, it was a forum, you have to not verify yourself. You didn't need a career identity. It's just based on trust and relationships. So you get karma points or somehow. But it was open. Anybody can participate. And in the platform you discuss, you can either discuss and vote up or down or no, I don't care, on the proposals that came from other congressmen. For example, they put it on the platform and you can vote yes. I like this, I don't like this. And they have all the discussion below. But also you can propose new laws yourself as a user. And if enough users voted, this is a good idea. The party itself, they also, they even voted for which ones were the candidates that you wanted for the list. They raised 4,000 signatures, so they got incorporated as an official party, and then they got like 200,000 votes. So it's not a small feat for a new party. And the thing is that their mascot was the Trojan horse because the elected congressman or the elected was a legislator, so. They had to vote in the same way that the platform decided the majority. The whole idea was to bring as liquid as possible a democracy in self-decurrent system. If eventually everybody agree or most people or most citizens start to think that this is a good way to bring more liquidity to the democracy, eventually you will end up having way more of these candidates than the others. Just like that, new change in the system and you got no revolution. Nobody cut anybody's head and it was all peaceful. It almost worked.

For it to work, we need to solve this. Some people say it's been solved. I don't know if it's here. We have some examples. They tried to do the whole UVI thing in Argentina as well with Ethereum. You have to prove your identity via Zoom call with a random person from the internet that verify you use Kleros, which is decentralized also in Ethereum, like dispute resolution system. Usually they all fail, but we need to basically solve one citizen of the Monero country one vote. There are some ways to achieve that.

And since it's the Monero country, we need to also ensure that the votes are all private and the citizens are all private as well. So there is CryptoPoll. I haven't looked as much into that as well. You just supposedly bring signatures to vote, but that we need. That unlocks a lot of the things.

Another criticism that in this case I don't think is a big problem is they ask all the time: "Okay, but we have the best money ever, it's so private, we are never gonna be able to have taxes in Monero country". And to that I say: "what do you need taxes for?" I know it's not that simple, but it's like, okay, Argentina works with half of the economy in the black market anyway, nobody pays taxes and kind of works. Kind, especially the kind part, it kind of works. So it's not impossible. It's not like you have a hundred percent solution, everybody pays taxes or not on one hand. And the other side, think taxes got a bad reputation because you're forced to taxes, but you're forced to pay taxes because the services are lousy. People are paying taxes all the time. They're called subscriptions. Netflix is a tax that you pay for someone to create content for you, basically. So. I'm hopeful, again, I'm an optimist. I know it's not that easy, but I think that if provide, if the Monero country is not forcing anybody to be a citizen, because nobody was born in the Monero country, we are meant to be enticing to people, we can provide good services and people will want to pay for them. So, no taxes, right?

And this is literally, I think that the model that we get there is basically to be the new Sishells or the old Swiss of the new century. We have the private money, we don't care, we can make it easier to create businesses and it has happened once and once again in the history of the world. You start with a little island that is close enough to where the ships go by, so you can rob them, but it's far enough so it's not that easy to attack the island afterwards so you get the island full of pirates. And then the pilots get a lot of money from the ships and they make pilot banks in the island. And eventually the island banks get really wealthy so that other like super serious, not pilot banks try to make business with them. And eventually you get, I won't name names, but let's say there are many countries right now that are super serious that started like this, right? So I think this model works. I think we can attract wealth to a Monero country because we are gonna be less friction, and we're to have a way better system because we're going create a new one.

So summing up, these are some of the thoughts that I had in this talk. And to finish it up, I think, again, like I said at the beginning, we in the Monero community, many of us, just like to do stuff first because we want to know if we can pull it off. I mean, it's like: "Oh, I had this idea, maybe it works". So to me, are all like, it's just like throwing pebbles on a pond. We do it because it's fun. First, then we do it because we want to see how far we can throw them, the song, or how many times we can make the skip. Right? And we are like, look at us. I managed to build this wallet, this Monerujo wallet. We want us to make this decentralized voting system. We want to make stuff all the time. So as long as we keep those three things in common, as long as we have like a strong opinion on how the work or like Monero country should look, I think we will keep throwing those pebbles on the lake and eventually we'll make an island out of them and we can move all there. So that's the Monero country. Thank you.

And I want to thank especially everybody that contributed to me being here because it was actually funded by the community and people that I don't know who they are. So really thank you to those who know who you are. Thank you.
