# BasicSwap

_**BasicSwap: An Atomic Swap DEX for Monero**_

_An overview of the different moving parts at work behind the BasicSwap DEX protocol, the vision for the project, and exploring how BasicSwap can power a better and more resilient future for XMR, free of central points of failure._

[https://youtu.be/V6B5xtWrohw](https://youtu.be/V6B5xtWrohw)

---

_**BasicSwap:**_ Well, I'm very happy to be here, guys. I'm with BasicSwap. I'm here to show you guys the atomic swap based DEX that we have right now. We presented something last year as well. We sort of went through the history of atomic swaps. Luke talked a little bit about atomic swaps for Monero. And in the past year there's some progress with the open source DEX, and I'm just here to sort of catch you guys up to speed, if you're not familiar with BasicSwap, hopefully you'll be more familiar after this speech.

So, quite simply, BasicSwap is, you could say, two things: it enables adapter signature swaps for XMR and other coins like Ethereum, not Ethereum, sorry, for Bitcoin, Litecoin, coins like Firo and Dash as well. We'll have our friends from wowmonero soon integrated into the DEX. We'll also have our friends at Decred.

So how this presentation is going to go, the structure of it would be we'll have the functions and the GUI of BasicSwap itself, the application, the under the hood, you could separate it pretty cleanly between the adapter signature swaps and the SMSG network, which is sort of the backbone of how you achieve a decentralized communication that enables the swaps to happen, and what's going to be ahead as far as the roadmap for the DEX and where we're going with all of that.

So to understand BasicSwap, think it's pretty useful to sort of separate it into ideas. First of all, it's a protocol. It's an open source protocol. It's not monetized, and it's currently supporting seven coins with two more that mentioned earlier coming up. And the ideas behind the atomic swaps, when it was created, it's very much about decentralization, it's about privacy, the adapter signature swap particularly, and we want to really make a DEX that's comprehensive remains true to those ideas that we all support here, of course.

But it's also an application. And it could be seen in some ways as… and the application is what most people here might be familiar with if you've already sort of played or been familiar with or came to the workshop yesterday as far as the BasicSwap goes. So that's the GUI you've already seen. And it's first of all a wallet in the sense, it's not first of all a wallet, but it could be understood as a wallet in the sense that you have all those coins that you wish to trade. For every coin that you wish to trade, you do have to run a node. And so if you already use a node, if you already operate your own node for Monero, for other coins that you're using, and you wish to do an atomic swap between those two coins, and you already have a node, it's very... you don't have to go through the hassle of re-downloading that node if you want to use BasicSwap. You can already sort of... It's a little finicky right now. We're still very much in beta, even in alpha. But you can plug that into the BasicSwap protocol, into the BasicSwap application to make those atomic swaps work for you.

It can be used as an OTC service. And you'll see later, I'll show you guys more what it looks like. It could be seen as a big large OTC desk. And it doesn't function as an AMM at all. There's an order book to it. But it's not an order book that you necessarily associate with a site like Binance or something like that. So it's a very unique sort of approach on how to do secure private swaps between to on-ramp onto Monero or off of Monero or to even have private and secure trades between something like Bitcoin and another privacy coin like Monero. So it can bring a lot of privacy to Bitcoin as well.

So yeah, so a lot of people that are passionate about those things are gonna find maybe something they're looking for in BasicSwap. We don't have KYC, of course, there's no accounts. And the adapter signature swap is a very interesting piece of cryptography in that there is no chain of custody when you achieve that. It's a very private, very elegant software, well, software… piece of cryptography, and it powers most of the swaps on the DEX right now.

So there's different reasons why we went the atomic swaps route. First of all, maybe when we started development of BasicSwap, there wasn't really an idea of what our competition was as far as people that were all in the same boat right now fixing the problem of what do we do when XMR and other privacy coins can't live adequately on centralized exchanges with all the regulations and the cracking down on privacy coins. So it was mostly a year and a half, two years ago about addressing that very toxic reality when it comes to privacy coins and then how more and more difficult it is right now to swap them. We went the atomic swap route.

So with atomic swaps, there's drawbacks, there's positives. You don't have any third parties, obviously. So two of two exchange atomic swaps are. You don't have arbiters and there's also very few moving parts in the protocol of BasicSwap itself, but also when it comes to adapter signature swaps as well. In that, it's a very elegant process, very little can go wrong, and it's already sort of... The hard part was really the very smart people that came and that invented the adapter signature atomic swap. I'm thinking here of Fournier and H4shed maybe worked with Parker to have, because I know he had a background in creating and he has a white paper on the XMR atomic swap.

So there's no intermediate coins, no wrapped assets either. It is slower than an AMM DEX and we also have different challenges when it comes to liquidity than the decks like Serai or something like... It may be more similar to Haveno when it comes to liquidity in some sense, but I'm not extremely familiar with Haveno, to be honest. And there's no conflict resolution to contend with. This is all already sort of baked in into the idea of the atomic swap itself.

And we'll go back on the SMSG aspects, keeping everything private and end-to-end encrypted, and decentralized and resilient. This is all in the spirit of, I think, in part what we're all here for today, but also in the spirit of what an adapter signature swap is all about to begin with. And there's no public swap history or anything of that nature.

So when we decided to do an atomic swap DEX, one of the first things we thought was we really want XMR in there. XMR is a very large, it's the largest privacy coin. It's private by default, sort of the authority a little bit on what a privacy coin is right now in the space. And even if you try to shut it down, it's still a very highly liquid privacy coin. And if a single coin can sort of stand up to the attacks on privacy that crypto is facing right now, it probably is XMR. But the XMR swap doesn't respond well to the original atomic swap. So that's where the adapter signature swap sort of comes from. It's a semi-scriptless protocol. And I'll go a little bit into that. But I don't want to delve into that too hard. As I mentioned earlier, if you're interested in more technical breakdown of how this adapter signature swap, what it entails, why is it scriptless or semi-scriptless? This excellent paper by Fournier. Fournier made it happen on ECDSA curves and then H4shed made it happen from Fournier to Monero. So if you are interested in sort of the… to read an academic paper and I do recommend it because it is beautiful stuff. And again, there's drawbacks but it's a very, very great piece of cryptography that those great intelligence people offered for us.

So to have a very quick sort of rundown of what does a happy path look like when you use BasicSwap to do an adapter signature swap. So this is just simply an adapter signature swap… pointing to the wrong screen here. So the first thing is, and why I called this semi-scriptless earlier, is you do need Bitcoin or Litecoin or the counterparty coin that you're using to swap in or out of Monero to handle some things for you if you want to have a successful swap. And some of those things are the refund transactions, the timeout transaction, not transaction, to enable a timeout, some typical smart contract elements that Monero is simply not capable of, as it's a much more rigid piece of software. And so this is sort of what the flow of the trade looks like. Something that is interesting and important to note that sort of makes it happen is how…

When Bob redeems his one Bitcoin, and again, I very much encourage you to go and look at, or speech last year actually went into that in more detail. It was mostly about atomic swaps and adapter signatures. But the idea being when Bob redeems his one Bitcoin after both contracts are funded, he leaks half the private key to Alice, who has the other half in her back pocket. So the act of Bob redeeming, and that's a terrible trade, one Bitcoin for one XMR, but I guess he really wants it. The act of redeeming that one Bitcoin makes it so Alice is now capable of redeeming her XMR. And if you can sort of infer what that means is there's really no, there's nothing in the fact that Bob redeemed his Bitcoin and leaked half of a private key on the Bitcoin network that associates it with Alice at any point or any given moment. So the chain of custody is extremely obfuscated. And I would say it's even nonexistent. Whereas so that's this sort of the Bitcoin side and the two shards side, Monero is as there's no smart contract again, it's a simpler process for Monero and there's no having to contend as far as all the signing, the presigning the refund transactions or anything like that.

So it's just to sort of have a very quick overview on the technical aspects of what does an adapter signature swap actually look like. And this is not something we developed. This is just something that we used to integrate into something that we're trying to make into a comprehensive privacy-first DEX that sort of answers some of the needs that XMR and other privacy coins have in this space right now.

So as I mentioned, Bitcoin must go first. So when Fournier did that thing, his paper, a big issue he had and something that we mentioned last year, we also mentioned at Monerotopia in Mexico last year, only the Bitcoin side could offer a trade and that's an issue at the center of the adapter signature swap for XMR. And the way we sort of circumvented that, and we did that in the last eight months and we were very happy to finally get that out, is we used the decentralized order book. And the decentralized order book I'm going to start talking about a little more in a second because again the two things make up this DEX, the adapter signature swap and SMSG. And the order book is very much a product of SMSG and the dissemination of data that SMSG enables this private and decentralized way.

So to fix this bi-directional swap problem, we use the decentralized order book to allow swap requests to populate the order book. And this might not make that much sense right now, but this is what it looks like. So this is a picture of the order book as it is at the moment. And the swaps that you see at the top and that you can take with the blue button on the right, the swaps that you see at the top are swaps that a Monero user initiated. And they look exactly the same except for the order of things as the swaps at the bottom, which are regular adapter signature swaps. You have this offer: "Hey, give me Monero and I'll give you Bitcoin", and you can swap. So the Bitcoin side initiated this, and you as the user have: "Do you have the Monero for this Bitcoin? Do you like this deal?" You can swap it.

The five items at the top, they are reversed atomic swaps in the sense that it is displayed as a swap, but it was put up as a you could call it a swap request. So it's a little bit of a hack. It's a creative way to use the SMSG network and the order book to be able to achieve a bidirectionality that is very important if you want to make it worth it for you to swap your XMR in or out. And not always have, as an XMR user, you won't always have to be in the situation where you always have to take somebody else's offer and somebody else's conditions as to like how they offer you the swap. So that was a very important step for BasicSwap to make it a lot more accessible and a lot more realistic to use for XMR holders that don't just get on there and they're bound to take somebody else's swap all the time. So that's something we were very happy with.

To briefly go over secure messaging. SMSG is the other half of BasicSwap. As we sort of saw his order book is all powered by SMSG. The adapter signature swap is a protocol that's very complex and it involves a lot of back and forth between the Bitcoin side, say, and the XMR side, say. And all of this back and forth needs to be handled in a way that remains true to the spirit of the adapter signature swap to begin with. So what that looks like is it was inspired by Bitmessage. It's a mixed net that uses peer-to-peer messaging to enable a sort of data layer for BasicSwap and make it the backbone of how the trades, how people find each other on the swap platform, how you get to enable a swap and to find some: "Okay, I like this guy's order I'm taking it all of that" is works in the background on the basis of this peer-to-peer network.

This is a little bit of a graph as far as how SMSG you could be thought of. Every person that runs a BasicSwap node is running an SMSG node and that means they are constantly disseminating taking in and take and putting out encrypted messages. Every message is encrypted. And if you think of a public message on BasicSwap, is public by virtue of everybody having the decryption key. So literally everything that happens on the SMSG network is end-to-end encrypted. it's made to be highly resistant, sort of like torrents, highly resistant to being shut down, but also highly resistant to chain analysis and to things like any sort of action that would want to take the network down that is very resilient with regards to that.

So simply put… Think I mentioned most of that… Yeah, and this is one example that you know the order book I mentioned. I mentioned the fact that the XMR swap, bidirectional swap is enabled by the fact that you can post something like that on the order book through SMSG. That all happens on the back end. On the front end it's a lot more straightforward. I don't know if some of you might have seen the workshop yesterday. We sort of went through every different aspect of what the DEX looks like. How do you use the wallets? How do you post a swap? How do you want to add a coin? I only started the thing with four coins, and I want to add a fifth one. All of that is also available in the documentation, of course.

But there's other things that this SMSG network does to create this comprehensive adapter signature swap platform. So you exchange and fetch data with it. You can automate swaps with it. There's very rudimentary right now liquidity tools that we already have available, but that's very much in beta. It's an alpha, actually. It's not even in beta at all - the way that works and the way this is sort of interacting with the network is through SMSG as well.

The order book itself, of course, something we're very excited about that hasn't come yet, but that we think we can do really, really cool stuff with is identities and private order books. This might come address something that Mr. Parker was asked earlier with regards to tainted coins. This is, again, I loved Parker's reply to that question and that is very much an agnostic approach. But if you want to take upon an identity or a private order book where you trust the person that has that identity and that you know, okay, this is relating to a guy that consistently offers coins that are not tainted and maybe charges a premium for it, but it's worth it because it's what you want and you want to do it through an atomic and adapter signature swap. That's perfect.

So that's the kind of stuff that we want to see going forward. I mentioned that. There's also some confusion I've seen on the forums before. None of this is monetized at all. SMSG is not monetized. Everything is open source. Please fork it. But even if you just contribute and make it easier to use, you're just contributing in my view and in the view of people that work on this project and are passionate about it, to the health of privacy coins in general and of XMR by extension.

So there's, yeah, just to mention also, there's some proof of work involved with SMSG. It's not something that's very noticeable when you use BasicSwap normally, but if you're trying to DDoS it or abused in that network, you'll notice it pretty quick. And as of now, we're sort of dipping our toes into an SMSG, too. But as it is right now, SMSG can handle a very large caseload of orders when it comes to how many users, consecutive users, would we need to really bottleneck the thing at the moment. It's a lot. It would be thousands and tens of thousands as of right now. And it's not something that we realistically think we're going to reach in the next couple of months. But we also have SMSG2 planned up. This is just to mention that a higher level of scalability might be needed to sort of bring this thing rolling into something that is a lot bigger. And even though there's drawbacks and positives to atomic swaps themselves, we think it can definitely become something that's more of a mainstream approach to swapping coins, especially if privacy and security and the resilience of the network you're trading on is something that's very important for you, as it is for us.

So quite quickly as well - we like to have this thing as a modular sort of piece of software. If you want to integrate it, we want to see it integrated. And we're working on having it integrated in different things. And part of the roadmap we would like to see in time, light wallets and remote services. This is maybe a little further than more coins something like Elizabeth Noot. I don't know if you guys were familiar with her Etherium/XMR atomic swap protocol something that would be we'd be interested in and we're looking into adding to the to the BasicSwap platform. Web Gateway, course would be pretty cool and it's something we're seriously working on. And as long as it's alive and as long as it remains this decentralized open source protocol an application, it will remain non-custodial and true to the principles of atomic swaps in general.

So thank you very much. This was just a...

_**Doug:**_ All right. We have time for one or two questions.
