# Francisco 'ArticMine' Cabanas

_**Scaling Monero in Response to Blockchain Surveillance**_

_The current regulatory environment provides serious challenges to the privacy offered by Monero. This can range from Blockchain Surveillance companies making false accusations to the risk of Flood XMR attacks in an attempt to de-anonimize Monero's ring signatures. The ultimate goal is to remove even the illusion of Blockchain Surveillance. This will require full membership proofs together with a sizable growth in organic Monero adoption. The larger the organic growth the stronger the anonymity set._

_We will provide a comprehensive set of scaling and fee algorithms that will support a reference transaction size of up to 8000 bytes. This will support the estimated 2 in 2 out transaction size for full membership proofs of approximately 5500 bytes and will even support a ring size of up to 64 using the current proofs as an interim measure. This will further harden the network against Flood XMR by lowering the ratio between the minimum penalty free zone and reference transaction size from 100x to 50x, and by more tightly pricing the growth of the short term median by reducing the surge of the short term median over the long term median from 50x to 16x, while at the same time transferring the growth to the tightly priced long term median. The latter rate of growth will increase from 1.7x to 2x. In addition an ultra long term median of 1,000,000 blocks will be proposed that will cap the overall growth of the network to Nielsen's Law of Internet Bandwidth for a high end consumer or small business upload Internet connection._

[https://youtu.be/dTj42N49jdk](https://youtu.be/dTj42N49jdk)

---

_**Francisco:**_ Thank you. One of the things I like to do is first give a very brief introduction about myself. When I got started - I'm an old Bitcoiner - I started in 2011, in those days you could buy a Bitcoin for about 5 Dollars Canadian, maybe 4 Dollars US. In the fall of 2011 I was living in Prince George, I started mining Bitcoin, I did some mining. And of course, that gets quite cold. Those are mining Bitcoin, you move around, always this cold weather. Now when I go get home, my hands were freezing, it was minus 20 or minus 25 C. So I would go and stick my hands behind the miners to warm myself up. And that's when I came with the idea of ArticMine.

I got involved with, did a lot of research in Bitcoin, primary initiative as an investor. And one of the things that bothered me about Bitcoin - it's all great technology and everything, but can people actually use it at scale? And the answer soon became clear to me that you couldn't. You only can do three, six transactions a second. This is great technology, great ideas, but is it going to be a world changer? Well, not if you can't compete on a volume. And I spent a lot of time researching this. And by complete accident, when I was researching scaling on Bitcoin, I came across Monero in 2014. And lo and behold, I researched it and I said: "Monero has a solution to this. It actually has an adaptive block size. And you can actually scale this thing and people can actually use it". And that really got me excited about it. And part of the history of it is I got involved with Monero for reasons that have nothing to do with privacy. It's kind of like you're getting off the Titanic, it's sinking, and the rescue ship only has private cameras. Great. But that was kind of the way I felt about it.

So I started Monero in 2014. I joined the Monero Core team in 2016, when at the time it was far more relevant than is today. And what I primarily have focused on in my work in Monero has been scaling. How does it scale? How do we actually go for large-scale scaling on level one? How many can we increase the transactions for a second? And this is kind of the focus.

And the response to some of the threats, which were mentioned, particularly the political threats, also have a scaling solution and they interact. The question of blockchain surveillance is something that's really troubled me, because in reality it is an illusion. It's the illusion of blockchain surveillance. Does it really work on Bitcoin? Is Bitcoin a surveillance coin? I love that question. And the answer is - I don't believe it is. Bitcoin is actually a privacy coin. There is privacy in Bitcoin. More than people give it credit for. And that might be a shocking comment because: oh, wait a minute, you can trace transactions on Bitcoin blockchain. I would argue you can't in any reliable way. But let's go back to basics. So I thought I'm going to start with the question of why is privacy a crime? I'm not going to talk about my t-shirt, but why is privacy a crime? And why are governments so afraid of it? And this is an important question.

So let's take a look at the Bitcoin whitepaper. It actually has a section on privacy. Now, this is a document that out in 2008. It addressed the question of privacy in a very simple area, but it talks about the traditional banking model. It achieves the level of privacy by limiting access to information of the parties involved and the trusted third party. Now, in the trusted third party, when dealing with a regulated bank, we're talking about the regulators that regulate that bank or that regulated financial institution. They, in general, should be seen as a trusted third party. And because they're trusted and they're heavily regulated, they can have access to the financial information. By restricting the information to trusted parties, you have a level of privacy. And in fact, it can be quite decent privacy.Now you say: we're gonna put it on a public blockchain, we're gonna announce all the transactions publicly. And then we ask the question of how do we have privacy on a public blockchain? And the argument, which is really interesting, says that privacy can still be maintained by breaking the flow of information in another place. And here's the key - keeping public keys anonymous. The key to privacy in Bitcoin is keeping the public key anonymous. This is right in the Bitcoin white paper. What we do, whether it's an add-on, which the governments have been both in America, United States and here in the European Union, have been desperately trying to stop, is they don't want the public keys to be anonymous. [There we go] They don't want these public keys to be anonymous. They want the illusion that they can surveil the public keys and somehow discern information about the people that control those keys. Public can see someone is sending an amount to somebody else - it's just about Bitcoin. But without information linking the transaction to anybody.Now, if I create a Bitcoin address, unless they buy Bitcoin anonymously and nobody can know and I put it in a Bitcoin address, does anybody know I own that Bitcoin address? The answer is no, it is anonymous. And this is by design. So it goes into the level of information, which is the stock exchanges, time and size, and then the "tape", is made public without telling who the parties are. So you see that the community of trades, not the individual trades.

So it's talked about a traditional privacy model, identities, transactions, trust the third party, this is where the government can do KYC and do all this other anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist financing, et cetera, counterparty, and then you have a barrier of public. In the new privacy model, don't have the trusted third party. You have identities, transactions public. So if you're going to turn around and introduce a trusted third party, you'll go back to the traditional privacy model. But the myth is this is actually an anonymous key. The myth of proxy surveillance, the illusion is that you can surveil this reliably. And the evidence is less and less than you can, and it's actually very dangerous. So now let's fast forward to 2023.

This is from "Markets in Crypto-Assets" in the European Union. And it's a very interesting regulation. It's the operation of a trade of cryptocurrencies from the Official Journal of the European Union. And it refers to an "inbuilt anonymisation function". And this is straight from the legislation. The operating rules of the trading platform for crypto-assets shall prevent the admission to trading of crypto-assets that have an inbuilt anonymization function unless the holders of those crypto-assets and their transaction history can be identified by the crypto-asset service providers operating a trading platform for crypto-assets. The requirement of this particular regulation is if I go back to the previous slide, somehow we can't have these public keys anonymous. And why is that? Because instead of doing [Press the right button] trusted third party and doing your KYC here, we somehow want to just break the privacy model here.Now, have anybody seen any evidence how this is done? No, but that's the basic essence. So the minute you try to do this... [Okay, here we go] the minute you try to do this, you have to build this becomes a threat. So you have to prohibit it somehow. You have to say: "Okay, we have this illusion that we can surveil it". So any kind of privacy becomes a threat to your compliance model - anti-money laundering, counter-terrorism financing, sanctions, evasion, whatever it is. If you're gonna solve a crime, you gotta put all the information public. You can't just do KYC in private, provide it to the exchange or the obliged entity. No. What we have to say is we're going to make all the information public and then let a company surveil the blockchain and maybe discern who actually made the transaction. And that's the essence of the illusion.Okay. So now we look at what's happened in the latest. A couple of criminal convictions. Bitcoin Fog case from Roman Sterlingov. The individual was accused of running Bitcoin Fog. And they provided some traces and argued that he issued certain Bitcoin transactions. But again, there's a lot of questions in this case. This is something that we heard from the attorneys involved. It will be appealed. And there was going to be a substantial orders of appeal. But it was based on this idea that you can surveil the blockchain. Did they get the wrong guy? Yeah, I believe they did. But the illusion of blockchain surveillance put this fellow in jail.

Now we go to an evidence. It's a bit different case there. But then the argument is that there's no justification for privacy on a blockchain. So we're going to do financial transactions and it's not justified. And if you're going to work in a peer-to-peer blockchain, you have to broadcast all your personal information so it can then be surveilled from which a company can then provide some indication as to whether or not there's risk of money laundering. Isn't it just simpler for the person who is dealing with the crypto asset service provider to do old fashioned KYC and provide the information in private to the crypto asset provider, which is called KYC, as opposed to say: we're gonna do the surveillance scheme? Again, there's a lot of reasons why we need privacy in financial transactions. And again, this is another case likely to be appealed. In fact, it's been appealed already.

There's another element in the United States of Tornado Cash, similar issue again. The fear of the privacy, the fear that we're gonna surveil the blockchain. And then we're gonna turn around and say: "We're gonna make privacy a crime". Because if you don't make privacy a crime, you can't surveil the blockchain. To maintain the illusion, privacy has to be a crime. Somourai wallet, United States - similar story.The bottom line here is the difference between the illusion and the reality of blockchain surveillance will be tested in the courts for years to come. And mark my words on this, I would not be surprised if the matter comes up before the European Court of Human Rights, because of serious interferences with the European Convention of Human Rights associated with this illusion. In the United States, you're talking the First and Fourth Amendments for starters, but again, there's serious constitutional problems. In other countries, again, like in Canada, the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, you go on and on and on. You can even argue in the case of the UK, you can go all the way to the Magna Carta. This is a serious problem. And this illusion lies at the heart of these attacks on privacy that we've seen and that a lot of us are talking about here. So really poses some great, some interesting challenges.

So why the conflict? Well again, traditional banking model has dealt with "bearer assets". Now bearer assets are cash, things like gold and precious metals, even bearer bonds, et cetera, for years, for decades. And if managed to address and mitigate the risk associated with money laundering, terrorism financing, and sanctions evasion, one common method is "know your customer". And a lot of people know like "know your customer", but it has to place particularly for large accounts. In this model, financial information is provided to the regulated obliged entity in private. The release of this information is subject to government regulations. In the European Union, we have something known as... We have privacy regulations. We can't divulge the private information. This financial information can then be used to provide a relation to address risk. There is no need to publicly broadcast the customer's financial information in order to avoid it. So this avoids the conflict. There's no conflict between privacy and compliance. You just have to look at the traditional financial system.So, now we move to the model of blockchain surveillance. The blockchain surveillance model attempts to deal with bearer assets such as Bitcoin, Monero, et cetera, while attempting to address and mitigate the risk associated with money laundering, terrorism financing, and sanctions evasion. The primary method is the surveillance of a public blockchain. In this model, the private information is broadcast by the user or by somebody on behalf of the user, and then the customer and then any attempt of privacy seen "high risk" or as worse as "criminal". The reliability of this model and the risk of false accusations is largely unknown and / or proprietary.

Has anybody seen accuracy information on any of the so-called analytics works that is done for anti-money laundering on Bitcoin or on Ethereum? Is there any publicly independently verifiable information how accurate this stuff is? Did they get the right guy? And the answer is no, because it's all unknown and proprietary. So the need to publicly broadcast, even for there to be a chance that this thing can work, is where the source of the conflict lies. And when you think about the problem objectively, sort of distance ourselves, we have to realize the situation we've got ourselves into.

And why there's a conflict. So for Monero, there two challenges primarily. The first group is what I call advocacy responses, legal responses, et cetera, and protection responses - I had a lot of great talks on this subject, there's lots of different ways to deal with it - and quite realistically, it doesn't matter. Individual members of a decentralized community are going to have totally different points of view of how you go about dealing with this problem. The more decentralized, the better. What works for me isn't going to work for you. It's that simple.The technical challenge is a different story. It requires the hardening of Monero's privacy to the degree that even the illusion of blockchain surveillance is removed from Monero. And the key point is the illusion. We can't have E-A-B, E-A-E attacks or sorry E-A-B-E-attacks. Even if they don't work, the possibility that it might work has to be eliminated. And that requires two things. Yes, the work of Full Chain Nembership Proofs absolutely vital. And fortunately, it's coming along very fast and very efficiently. The second one is we have to increase the use of Monero and scale it. It's called privacy in numbers. I used to say it was enough to at least become as big in transactions as Ethereum. That's too little. We should be aiming for Visa transaction levels. Let's drown the Bitcoin surveillance companies in Monero. Right now, maybe they can drown in Ether. It's big enough, they can start to drown in it. Let's drown them in Monero. So many transactions - they won't have a hope. So it's about the illusion.[Okay, so come to the next slide] So now we get into the technical elements. What are we going to do on the scaling side. And this where this talk shifts more into let's roll up our sleeves, let's figure out how do we make Monero scale and what we have to do and what some of the technical definitions are.

Okay, so this is a part of definitions, a bit boring. The first area here is what we call reference transaction size. By that I mean it's bigger, somewhat bigger, say about 20 % bigger than a typical transaction. And kind of the figures of Full Chain Membership Proofs have been discussed. Puts it in this kind of range of about 4,000 bytes, maybe a bit smaller than that, the high threes. So a 4,000 byte will barely make it, just about make it. And at 8,000 bytes, we're really comfortable. The difference is we need a higher fee. MB, this is the TR, MB is the block size and byte, the each block. These are block periods. The one of interest here is Monero, but it's kind of interesting to compare with some of the other coins. We're a two-minute coin. Bitcoin is a 10, Bitcoin Cash - 10. Zcash at 75. Think of Bitcoin with eight times the transactions. They were spammed and they were spammed attacked badly. So this is something to keep in mind. You know, how you control these things. Litecoin is 150. On estimating the transactions per second, you just divide that. You multiply the block period by block size. You divide by the transaction rate and you get your TPS, your transactions per second. And by the way, Visa's about 6,700 transactions per second average.

So now we look at some other factors here, our basis, the block reward. This by the way is a very important parameter. In Monero, unlike Bitcoin, and unlike most coins, we have a tail emission of fixed block reward of 0.6 Monero. This is a critical parameter in understanding the security of Monero and in fighting any kind of spam attacks or what's called 51 % attacks.Fees, this is the penalty, very simple - you take the percentage increase in the block reward and you multiply by B squared. So the penalty is when I want to increase the block size in Monero to adapt the block size, let's say I'm at 400,000 bytes and I want to increase it by 10% - that's 40,000 bytes - I'm going have to pay, the miner has to pay a penalty of, well, it's the ratio of 440,000 to 400,000, that's 0.1, 10%, and then we square it as .01. So .01 of my block reward is forfeited to this penalty, effectively burned, because we have a fixed amount. In order for the miner to pay for this, the money has to come from somewhere and it has to be compensated by fees. So this is the key element of fee markets in Monero. You want to increase the block size, you pay a penalty, and you lose a portion of your block reward. So you want to get it from somewhere else. So this is the idea. This is a maximum block time, MBMax, a temp of mining. That's the set in the protocol twice, the median, MN, which you also call it MS, and so what that says is you can only double the block in the short-term median. And I'll explain this later on. But the basic idea is that you can only go to twice as much.

So now we have some of the changes we're proposing. The first change is to increase what we call ZM, some minimum penalty free zone. It's currently 300,000 bytes, and it's been increasing it to 400,000. One of the ideas here is, from what we're looking at, we're going to go from about 2,000 bytes to the high threes. We're going to go somewhere like, well, 30,000, 39,000 bytes for transaction sizes with Full-chain Membership Proofs. So we increase this to compensate, and it'll be approximately 1%.

The new idea is to introduce an extra median, a very long median, of a million blocks that's roughly two years in the Bitcoin blockchain. And that tracks roughly what's called as Nielsen's law. And what Nielsen's law is the increase in bandwidth as we increase with time. And that's basically been 50 % a year going back to the 1980s. We're going from essentially a hybrid, well, basically it's a hybrid copper fiber network, and as we move the fiber closer and closer and closer to the home and then to the room you increase the bandwidth. So that the ideas that are roughly track Nielsen's law.

And you do a median calculation. So you calculate your block size, the minimum of that and twice the amount of… you double, you only have to… then it's gotta be the maximum of that. It's gotta be greater than ZM and MA over two. And you do a recursive calculation. I got an excellent question just before we talk about this. When you're doing a recursive calculation, you start with MA, but when you wanna jumpstart the set right at the very beginning, the very first one, you don't have a medium MA. You've got to start with ZM. So in your first recursive calculation, the number you put in is ZM. And then after that, as you work through the chain, every other case is the previous 1,000.

[So we're now going into next slide. There we go] So this is what we call the long-term median that's currently in existence. The main change here is against a median of 100,000 blocks. Again, we start at ML. We do the recursive calculation. Now the difference is now we're going to cap it in protocol to this MA. So you can only go this amount. So if you have a really sharp increase in ML, once you get to this level, until MA moves, you can't increase it any further. So this is where the cap occurs. But it's also going to be the option of using node relay to price it at earlier stages. And the idea here is to create a flexibility so that the community can respond to events without having to go to protocol, we say: Okay, well, let's put a fee, because maybe we're worried that we're going too fast, or maybe we'll have a spam attack. And this is an option that can be done at node relay. And you don't necessarily have to go to these numbers, but you can do it. Now you've got a tool to use it, and you don't have to change the protocol in order to actually do it. So it's a less restrictive way of addressing the problem.So the surge factor is another interesting question. And the original idea in the surge factor is how much we're going to allow the short-term median to grow with respect to the long-term median. And this is a critical element in things such as Black Marble attacks. Why do we need it? Well, if we research the Visa network, what we'll find is that they have to have a search capability of 20 times approximately their average transaction per second. So I said about 6,700, multiply that by 20, you earn 134,000, in that kind of range. And the reason you need this is because there's very few days in the year in the Christmas holiday season when everybody decides to buy gifts just in the last minute before Christmas, so a few other surges from other holidays, and so they've got to make sure that they can clear these transactions. So they need this factor. In Monero, it used to be 50, and one of the plans is to reduce this down to what is actually needed, which is going to close it to 16. There's that doubling of the final block size that gives you actually 32. So this is reducing this down. We lower the maximum growth in MS over five cycles. The more important element is you really make it a lot harder to launch a black marble attack because now you're capping it at this point. And if this number is greater than your ring size, well, your black marble attack is thought, the illusion starts to go away.

So this is the basic changes to protocol proposed. And the main issue is the introduction of the long-term median. Sorry, the sanity or ultra long-term median. The second item is the tweaking of the short-term median by lowering the surge factor to really what is needed from the Visa history to 16. So lowering that down we're increasing the growth of the long-term median slightly to account for the fact that we're dropping this down from 1.7 to 2. And we're introducing the sanity median that gives us the tool to be able to add a cost to increasing the block size without going to have to go back to protocol, it gives us a much stronger flexibility than we had before.So now we're going to do a little review on the fee markets. Fee markets in Monero are really interesting because they kind of straddle the Bitcoin block size fight in Bitcoin. And if actually you find a median between the two. There are three markets.

The fee market basically is the interaction between the rational miners and rational users. A rational miner seeks maximum returns. Rational users seek to pay the lowest fee. And then given a finite transaction in the pool, the optimal set is actually the correct solution. It's a discrete optimization problem. But it's a very simple approximation, which I like to call the infinitesimal transaction approximation, which simplifies this issue, as I will explain. But that's actually, strictly speaking, discrete optimization problem.

And so what you want to do is you make an approximation. The miner owes the transaction in order of fee per byte. The miner then adds transactions to the block, starting with the highest paying transaction first. The miner tests this transaction for profit against the penalty and or the miner cost. Now, miner cost, what I'm referring to is other additional things, for example, in certain circumstances, you could get a case where you have orphan blocks, and in fact, it's a paper by a fellow called Peter Rizzo, who is one of the Bitcoin Cash, I think he's a developer there, and he came out where he would argue you can create an effective penalty out of the risk of orphan blocks. So that's kind of an add-on that you can add in there. And then the miner stops, and either the miner runs out of transactions, or the miner runs out of the block and various reach. So you have two possibilities. You run out of transactions or you run out of space. In this case, you're on a space in the block if the people are paying a lot of money. Or you have to run a transaction to meet this criteria. So what you do is you order the transactions. You start mining the highest paying first. And once the penalty meets the transaction fee, which is the lowest transaction fee you can allow, as a penalty rises, the transaction fee falls, you get a sweet point and you stop there. And that determines, so the lowest paying transaction pays the highest penalty. And you're looking at the incremental penalty for adding that transaction. This works if the size of the transaction is very much less than the size of the block. And then you're to approximate it in this manner.

So you have three possible fee markets. And the first case is where MB is a lot less than ML. ML, of course, is your penalty-free zone now in your MS. So the minimum free zone means set end, but ML becomes the penalty-free zone. And what this is essentially you have a large Bitcoin large block scenario, and what you have is in that case is no penalty because you can just you filling it up before you hit the penalty So B and BT equals zero. Theoretically fees can be here. This was the case of Bitcoin till about somewhere between 2014 and 2016, when they started having a problem with blocks filling up.And it's a current case of Bitcoin Cash. The key thing to understand here - this is the Bitcoin, Monero, large Bitcoin block case - is that the fee and reward is very low, lower than in Monero. And the only reason really Monero can support a minimum fee and reward, if not really, is because of the threat of a penalty should this condition occur. So this is kind of where we've been most of the time, except for cases where we've gone over into the penalty. So most of the time we've been in case one, and our fee is basically set by this threat of the increase.The next case is case two, which is what I call the pure Monero case. And in here, you're in the penalty. And this is a really important formula. You add a transaction of size T to a block at point B in penalty and define the training transaction of penalty, it becomes then RBase(B+BT). You square this. You take the difference of the B squared, and you left these two terms. This is the transaction that you're adding, and this is the point in the penalty that you're adding it at. And then what it tells you is you better get a fee from the transaction equal to this to overcome the penalty.So this is a critical formula for a Monero fee market. This term is essentially what you have if your B is 0, which is a quadratic. It's very small. And then this is the term. If you fill up the block entirely, the ratio between these terms for 1 % growth is actually 200, which means your highest fee at the top with B equal to 1 would be equal to the ratio of these two. So B is 0.1 can figure out what we have here. So if BT is 0.01, you can calculate that's where get 200. Because you're dividing basically 1 by 0.01. And that's where you get this factor in the fees. So as you increase your fee, and the penalty goes basically up to two hundred times.

[There we go. That's what I think] Okay. Then in the next case, we have a very interesting case which you haven't seen yet. And I call this "Monero plus Small Block Bitcoin case". And this happens once you max out MS and MB. Actually, it's bigger than 16 ML. So you have a situation where you've maxed out MS, your short-term median, but you're still left with that last scaling where you can still add a block twice the size of your median. Now, what's different about this area is that there's no more scaling because MS is capped by ML, which in turn could be capped by MA.

And so what happens at this point is you have an increase in penalty, and then you get a small Bitcoin block type block. So you actually end up with a behavior similar to Bitcoin. And you're hitting the barrier. But instead of the way Bitcoin works, which is going to be thought of as slamming into a brick wall, what you have in Monero is something like this. You hit it, but you actually get a stiff spring. You get some resistance for one last doubling of the block size. And this resistance is against this very steep penalty curve that goes from by a factor of 200, as you keep pushing harder and harder into the penalty, the fee keeps going up and up and up, just to the penalty. And so you have, instead of hitting a brick wall like in Bitcoin, you have a stiff spring. So you can think of, you go to a railway station, you see a big spring, so train comes in, and it can actually hit these things and slow it down. That's kind of the idea, rather than smashing into a brick wall, as in the case of Bitcoin.Now, what's interesting is that the Bitcoin fee in the world is higher than in Monero, which would kind of say... Now, the other interesting point here to notice is everything's dependent on this block reward, which has some really scary issues for Bitcoin, because if our base goes to zero, all of these penalties and incentives go to zero, and you basically have zero cost for attacks. That's  something to keep in mind we should we look at these formulas.

Okay So now we're going to talk about attacks. And these are the two favorite ones have been discussed - Big Bang and Flood XMR / Black Marble. And I'm gonna cover them briefly here.

So the first one is Big Bang. Big Bang basically, it's sort of a malicious attack for no reason kind of thing. Let's attack Monero. Trouble with that is it's actually cheaper just to 51 % Monero than this to do a Big Bang. But it is an attack that can be done as an add-on to a 51 % attack. And that was the question of Big Bang attack. It hasn't happened. So if they already have 51 % attack, you need to do this other attack. The key thing about Big Bang is there's no particular blockchain surveillance motive in the attack itself. It's not designed for any physical purposes, more like at a mouse. The more interesting one is what we call Flood XMR / Black Marble.Now in Flood XMR / Black Marble the adversary, what the adversary is trying to do is flood the Monero blockchain with enough outputs and control enough of them that they can somehow lower the ring signature. So if you control, let's say, 50 % of the outputs, you can halve your ring signature, and then you get back into the arguments of blockchain surveillance. Well, it's a probability game, we've flipped the odds, et cetera, et et cetera.

Now, I don't mind saying something. I'm actually certified in blockchain surveillance through CypherTrace. That might surprise people. And I took the training. That's part of what I was working with on the Sterlingov case. So I'm actually, I did very well on the exam. I actually aced it, like 20 out of 20. It's kind of like training a fox and building chicken coops, or certifying them on how to build them. It's kind of really interesting. But one of things that I really found about it interesting is that it's a very tempting thing to do. And a lot of the people that were there, many of were law enforcement, actually what they were really interested in was how you do Monero? That was the big thing and was a lot of probability and it's not really part of this training and blah, blah, blah, because it was a Bitcoin thing.But this idea, the temptation is with this stuff. There is a temptation. We can lower the ring size and then maybe we can make the cell that we can do in Monero, and then we can do some kind of whatever, which in fact doesn't really work, but okay, we can do this. So the really only powerful remedy for this is Full-chain Membership Proofs. That just totally wipes out the illusion. But you can actually do something interesting. And that is, what you do is you can say: okay, well, if I have only a search factor of 16 and I have a ring size of 60, well, guess what? I can only search my black marble attack, say, 16 times. But I'm up against this massive ring size. That's a mitigation. So if you make your ring size significantly larger in your surge factor, you can actually take the illusion away. I know a lot of work has been done. Ruknium actually did a lot of work on this issue of what is the optimal price for a certain budget, et cetera, et cetera, and concluded on this couple of numbers was actually optimal without factoring in this end. But if you change the surge factor and then you put in ruknium's analysis, it's kind of interesting. Because now you're saying: well, all I can raise it is 16 fold and I'm up against a ring size of 60.

Well, I'm still going to be left with some issue. Pricing, of course, is a mitigation, increase the ring size. The other one is pricing. And it's important to realize that tight pricing is very important. Zcash was attacked for six months in 2023. And the reason they were attacked was pricing. If you look at the Black Marble attacks that we've seen in Monero, they're kind of very little. They kind of give up. Maybe they try something. But you get the feeling in many respects that the attacker can be frustrated and simply worn down fighting all the medians and etc. So that's sort of the idea here.

[Okay, I'm into this, guy. That's what it is]. Now, one thing to always bear in mind with these type of attacks is that everything is based on this tail emission. And if you do not have, if this goes to zero, the whole thing collapses. The whole security anti-spam model collapses in Monero. This is something really important for Bitcoiners to realize. I'm sorry to tell you. But I think you have a problem with this business of falling block rewards. Because this is the root cause, this falling of, in my opinion, the root cause of the block size debates in Bitcoin. Monero solved it. Monero solved it by a simple way. We simply have a tail emission, which is roughly equivalent to stopping the halving of Bitcoin at where we are right now. But that's something to consider when we're dealing with this. This is what's essentially protecting Monero from a lot of this.

Okay. Fees and the use of node relay or non-consensus flexibility. Now again, the idea here is to oppose fee changes. So couple of things we can do. Because it's so close with a larger ring size, we're going to go over 4,000 bytes fairly easily. So we move up to a 2 % reference transaction instead of 8,000 bytes. For more I can tell, the Monero Full-chain Membership Proofs are going to be very close to here, you stand there. So we return to normal scaling.

So essentially we're increasing all the fees by four times. It seems to be a fair amount of consensus in this direction to do this. And we can add down the road, if we wanted to, after Full-chain Membership Proofs could add in a fee level that allows for 1 % in. So increasing it will do that the other thing we can do and these you know who can increase it also further if these conditions are met essentially providing a way of, you know, if we have a really sized growth moderating the growth of the blockchain at these other points. That's an option that we have.

Okay. Bandwidth requirements. What are we looking at? Well, it's quite interesting. No scaling. And when I say 2.5 factor I'm assuming we're moving blocks in each transaction get moved roughly 2 and 1 times. This could be lowered. We're broadcasting the transaction, then broadcasting the block of the transaction, and this kind of stuff. And then with no scaling, kind of where we are below - you're actually at basically a little faster than a dial-up modem, about 6700 TPS, about twice the speed of a dial-up modem. ISDN speeds, basically. If you know what an ISDN line is from about 25 years ago. You surge at 1.5 megabytes. This is the maximum, or the hard spring, which is 2.2 megabytes.And again, you're looking at one transactional second, 16 transactional seconds, about 32. Then you go to this 256 level, kind of like PayPal 256. Now keep in mind, you always have to look at the, this is the average. This is equivalent to Visa 6700. This is a surge. So you surge it 16 times. Again, I think in practice, I don't think we're gonna see the hard spring go all the way. It's just too expensive. It's probably gonna stop around 20 or something like that, maybe 25. So that's something to keep in mind. We can do something about this here. But we're in things like 546 megabytes at 256. Here we're going 1,000 times. So this is about 1,000 transactions a second on chain at the beginning. And again, we're dealing with 1.1 gigabits. This is well within. Even this is here, Monero, note, for example. It's fine with 2.2 gigabits. And it's got a massive graphics processor in there that can be used to do parallel processing, a key element in this is going to be parallel processing. This is going to the high end, again within the range you take in the data center. And yes, there are internet connections, residential, small business, and the gold is high right now, the high end. And you're kind of approaching Visa levels. I think in a realistic sense Monero could comfortably handle Visa transaction rates in a decade. We're allowed for scaling of the blockchain and we're allowed for growth in Nielsen's law, which is highly relevant. So this is kind of where we're going.

Some considerations. This is by the way for unpruned nodes, so we're not pruning the nodes. The other thing to bear in mind is this surge is only for a very short period of time, and like a couple of days or so. So for example, one could think of the idea of maybe running a standard node for like 51 weeks of the year for one week going to a pruned node and then going back again once that surge is over and sort of catching up. So you have those kind of options to consider.This is an interesting figure. For people that know what DOCSIS is the data of cable internet services. This is basically the cable modems. They tend to max out at 10 gigabits in one direction, 60 gigabit in the future. One of the major changes that we have seen is that the cable companies, and I saw, have gone from essentially, until about a year ago, you would see the cable company take part of their bandwidth and use it for traditional cable television and the rest for internet services. And what they've done is they've taken out that traditional television and say: "Okay, if you want cable television, we'll provide it to you over the regular internet, and now you have to subscribe an internet service", and then they provide cable television over that. So now the entire bandwidth is used for the internet, and then they just deliver the cable television over your internet connection, and what that does is it frees up the whole thing and allows this. And with DOCSIS 4.1, you can go down to about somewhere like 10 gigabits one direction and 2 gigabits up. So they really are moving towards dealing with this.

Again, you want eliminate share of reduction transaction and transaction data. This is important. Parallel processing is very important. Surge is the exception, not the norm in financial transaction networks. Again, we're dealing on this situation, have to deal for a small time of the year. Most of the time, we're done. So for example, we can do new node synchronization outside of that window. And so you could control it that way. A key element is less maintained flexibility, which is one of the big advantages of dealing with Monero node relay over consensus. We need to be able to respond. What happens if it's a sudden, you know, a couple of legal cases throughout blockchain surveillance and suddenly everybody wants to jump onto the Monero blockchain of which has been quietly growing and improving, and we're dealing with these kind of things.

So this is kind of the considerations that we have to do and some of the questions that we have. And we're going to move on for questions and discussion.
