# John Winter Murphy

_**Monero is Free and Open Source Software**_

_This talk will give a brief history of what free and open source software (FOSS) really means and how the term(s) originated. After covering the high level milestones in the history of this nascent movement, I will try to cover how Monero fits in to this landscape in terms of the ways that Monero software is licensed as well as contributions it has made back to the wider ecosystem._

[https://youtu.be/p6yVMivL5kc](https://youtu.be/p6yVMivL5kc)

---

_**John:**_ I will be quick as I can. Thank you everyone for sticking around. I am John Murphy. I've been involved in Monero for about 10 years, a little over 10 years now, so basically since the beginning. And I've been involved in the open source movement or world slightly longer than that. I started to get interested in Python and GNU Octave, which is like a Matlab alternative, and Linux as well when I was in grad school in about 2011, 2012. Now I'm a professor at Cecil College where I teach engineering.

So I give lots of talks, but this is my first time speaking at a cryptocurrency conference. I'm very honored to be here with you Monero folks and non-Monero folks in the audience. And I'm sure all of you guys have some ideas about what does free and open source software mean, and maybe some of the history that entails as well. But I'm gonna give you, hopefully, a little bit of new information here at least.

So what is this term FOSS and where did it come from? This is like the 40,000 foot view. There was kind of this pre-era where whenever you bought a computer, they would give you all of the software and the code for that software with the computer and you were kind of free to tinker as you wished. And then in the 1980s, which you may know is around the time when companies like Microsoft and Apple started to grow, Richard Stallman, who I'm sure probably most of the people in the audience are familiar with his name, kind of began his crusade in this free software movement.

And it's an interesting story how I got started, but I'm going to move on and go quickly over this whole overview. But Richard Stallman - you could call him an extremist. He is more like a mere talkie, I guess, in the cryptocurrency world. And then later in the 1990s, we had this kind of group of more friendly business people who wanted to bring free software to the normies, and they were gonna call it open source instead. And the term was coined by this woman, Christine Peterson, who has a degree in chemistry from MIT. But she really seems to have kind of made a career for herself basically giving Ted talks. But it was a group of people kind of with her, John "maddog" Hall, the guy who worked at Silicon Valley Graphics, all the way back to Bell Labs. He's been around since the 60s. Larry Augustine is a VC guy, so he's one of those business people who wanted to make it more approachable. And then Eric Raymond and Bruce Perens are co-founders of the Open Source Initiative, as well as Eric Raymond wrote a book called "The Cathedral and the Bazaar". And that's his picture there on the bottom right and a quote from him: "Given enough eyeballs, all bugs are shallow".

And there was kind of three periods, four periods, I'm gonna go over here. We have this public domain era where you got all of the software with your computer and you were free to tinker. And then there was, from about 1980 until 1990, I would say is the Stallman era where this term free software came into use. And then between 1990 and 2000, we have Linux, the birth of Linux, as well as several big battles with the government and Microsoft, as well as the coining of this term "open source". And then from about 2000 on, maybe 2010, people started to use this term FOSS. At this point now, the entire internet runs on open source software. IBM bought Red Hat for almost $50 billion, which is an indication of how valuable these open source companies have become. And almost every company in the world uses open source software, whether they know it or not.

So starting with Stallman, he graduated from Harvard with a degree in physics, but he was very interested in computers. So he went to MIT and joined the AI lab, which imagine that they had an AI lab in like 1978 at MIT. And he got really aggravated. One of the stories that like why did Richard Stallman wrote a Manifesto as well as the GNU Toolchain and the licenses that surround it. And in this Manifesto he defined four freedoms that users of software should have.

And he did this as a response to several things, one of which was the 1976 Copyright Act, which codified the rights of copyright holders that only copyright holders could produce, modify, distribute, et cetera. And it extended that copyright to be at least 80 years or so. And actually, one of the stories about why he got so upset was his lab at MIT replaced their LPX printer with a Xerox printer. And on the old printer, they gave him the firmware and he was able to modify it to like send a message to users when their print job was done or notify all users the printer was down. And Xerox was like: "No, you can't have it". So, you know, that was like we wouldn't all be sitting here if it wasn't for Xerox telling Richard Stallman to go fuck himself 40 years ago. But he defined in his manifesto these four freedoms that you should be able to run the program as you wish, study how it works, so you need to be able to see the source code rate, and redistribute, as well as redistribute modified copies of the software.

And just to emphasize, "free" software does not mean free as in beer. It generally is free as in beer, but it means free as in freedom, not as in price.

So Stallman is working on this new toolset all through the 80s. There's a project called MINIX, which is a predecessor to Linux. It was released in 87, which used the new toolchain. And then, Linus Torvalds released the Linux kernel in 1991. And he used that new toolchain that… so he was building on other people's work, right? That's kind of a foundation of open source software is you can reuse everyone else's work. And he stated that if the new kernel was around, he would not have attempted this. And there's a funny use net or message group message here from Linus. I just like that first sentence: I'm doing a (free) operating system (just a hobby, won't be anything big and professional). And now the whole internet runs on it, right?

So, and this movement has resulted in figures, leading large organizations like this guy is the CEO of Linux basically, right? I mean, he's the benevolent dictator for life or whatever you want to call him, but you don't see the CEO of IBM communicating with the CEO of NVIDIA like this, right? It produces a different type of behaviors, which he discusses there in the bottom right. And I think it's a work environment that many of us appreciate more than the corporate lifestyle, I guess.

So, where did this term "open source software" come from? In the 90s, as I said Stallman is a pretty polarizing figure. He believes that open source software is a moral issue. He also believes that it's a more efficient approach to development. But I mean, he treats it as an existential issue on this. And so there's this group of people in Silicon Valley and they're like: "This guy's a little, and we wanna bring Linux to more people". So around the time that they released the source code to Netscape Navigator, they had this meeting where Christine coined the term and then Linus and Tim O'Reilly, who you guys know, I'm sure, from his books, decided to help promulgate and endorse this term. And so that was the kind of start of open source.

So a couple important junctures real quick. The early 1990s involved a lot of open source cryptography software that the government was treating as munitions. The United States government still treats cryptography as munitions. I believe for the source code of a certain programs that the UE uses. But this was for encryption, PGP, this involved guys like Hal Finney, Phil Zimmer. It was ultimately Daniel Bernstein who went to the Supreme Court over these issues. But again, you can see this attitude, kind of confrontational, not political attitude. And it's the same kind of attitude that we saw on stage from Amir earlier.

And I think that this kind of attitude was somewhat, people felt like: "Yeah, we should behave like this, because we see behavior from Microsoft over the course of a decade to try and bully Linux companies like Red Hat out of business". So Microsoft bought up some patents and then tried to scare Linux companies from using open source technology and put them out of business. And you can see how things have turned around for them, because now they include Linux in Windows.

[…]

Yes, that as well. So, there we go. So, important modern examples of FOSS. I'm not gonna, I've already talked about the internet, Android, honestly, it doesn't really count anymore and we're all familiar with Bitcoin, I'm sure. So, licensing is very important in open source projects. And I talked about the 1976 copyright law, and Stallman came up with this term "copyleft" which is about giving users of the software right or the product right.

And there's kind of three strong categories I would say that you should know about. There's the permissive ones like MIT. This includes all cryptocurrency projects. Weakly protective is LGPL. That's the lesser GPL license. It's used by Linux. It allows you to use that code as long as you only dynamically link it, I believe, in your project without your project becoming infected by the GPL license. And so the strongly protective GPL licenses mean if you include that code in your project, then you have to basically license your project GPL and give your users all of the same rights from the code that you are reusing.

So there's a funny flowchart over here, which is too small to read, but if we blow up that center part: what should users do? Acknowledge my work? Then you should use something permissive over there. You pay me, there's commercial licenses, or digest, adopt, and obey the tenets of free software. That's Richard Stallman: GPL, LGPL, and AGPL. Aferro GPL is a license which I think if you run someone's code on your server and modify it, you're obliged to share that code with everyone somehow.

So yeah, cryptocurrency though is generally in that permissive category. This type of licensing or copyleft has been extended to other mediums besides software. If you're dealing in artwork, it's more common to come across these Creative Commons Licenses, but they're somewhat intermingleable with the ones on the previous slide.

So here's a real quick, that's the MIT license from the Bitcoin project in its entirety on the left. And that long column is the entire GPL version two, version three is even longer. So the MIT license is very simple and easy to understand, just as you have to acknowledge my work if you use this code, right? GPL version two, you can see up front, it's very political. They're talking about freedoms. And so I mean that you can see where that kind of, when it was only Richard Stallman pushing this movement, why maybe there were some people who were like: "We need to kind of mainstream this a little bit more".

So how to make good FOSS. This is from Eric Raymond's book. There's a lot of stuff in here that is very jargony, like numbers 16 and 17. I don't have any idea what that means, honestly, but I think these are the important points here. You know, you get feedback constantly because you're constantly releasing code to your users who tend to be also co-developers. This model has demonstrated that it works for operating systems, web servers, cryptography, It's really been demonstrated as a new way to produce public goods, really. I mean, these are non-commercial public goods.

So, how does Monero fit into this FOSS universe? Well, we can start with the birth of Monero. It was forked from Bytecoin. Bytecoin was a giant scam, but it was licensed, an MIT license, so anyone could fork it. And I downloaded the source code and I listed the Git commits in reverse order for Monero. And so there you can see at the top, the very first commit shared by Bytecoin and Monero still. And if we cat, "cat" is a new tool, if we cat the license file and we see that same MIT license file that was used in Bytecoin, right? And if we cat the readme, there's a little Easter egg. That was the original readme for the… typically where you have some install or maybe like what the project's about. You're just like: "That's it, fresh and juicy".

So another important contribution of the open source community to Monero, I would say, is in the mining ecosystem for Monero, which got off to a really, really bad start. Because Bytecoin was a scam, it was released with an intentionally crippled miner built into the software. And so you can look up these articles from that. August 2014 one is from a professor at Carnegie Mellon who claims he had over 50% of the network hash rate using AWS and his own custom closed source miner, right? And for a long time, this guy Claymore, he's a GPU miner developer, released a closed source miner with a 1% tax and he was probably collecting 1% of the Monero for a long time, because everybody used his miner.

But we have some redemption. And there was also an ASIC released by Bitmain, which resulted in RandomX, which is kind of the redemption arc here. So as a result of all these closed source shenanigans and some other stuff as well, we ended up with RandomX by a developer, tevador. And we've been able to do that kind of reached a nice open source miner with XMrig, XMrig proxy and P2Pool, which are primarily all developed by Seth. So those you can see in the commits, they're about five years and seven years old.

And then giving back to the broader FOSS community, this same proof of work or a derivative of this RandomX proof of work is now used in the Tor network, another open source public good software, where it's used as a DDoS prevention mechanism. And I highlighted this because I picked this screenshot because of the quote from Trump down at the bottom there. I just appreciate Trump's pedanticism on the top there. What is a proof of work algorithm and what is a hash function?

But yeah, I mean, just to show one more, like how long does this take? Cause if we go back… what's the first rule? First two rules, every good work of software starts by scratching a developer's personal itch. Right? This guy tevador loved working, I don't know why, but he loved working on this proof of work algorithm. You can see he spent five years here on RandomX itself. And you can see he's communicating with the Tor developers in 2020, and it's finally added to the network just last year. So he's dedicated years of his life to contributing to Monero as well as Tor now. For whatever reason he's interested in it, I mean, who knows? Maybe tevador is like reliant on darknet markets for his other business and he needs Monero to exist. I don't know but why he does it… you don't need to know why these people are interested if people are interested in things, and it tends to work out well.

So how to make the FOSS - you can follow me on GitHub, and I will try and answer any questions you guys have, and thank you for listening.
