# Luke 'Kayaba' Parker

_**Serai: Decentralizing Exchanges for Monero**_

_This talk will be an introduction and overview for Serai, a decentralized exchange which will support Monero at launch._

[https://youtu.be/BBLHfSZU_OI](https://youtu.be/BBLHfSZU_OI)

---

_**Luke:**_ I always like to start my talks with an introduction. I'm not sure if anyone here knew that. Luke Parker, kayaba, kayabanerve - developer of fullchain membership proofs and the "plus-plus" variant and of course, Serai, current talk. I'm also a MAGIC Monero Fund committee member. If you want to donate to Monero development and get US tax deductions, MAGIC is a 501c3 charity. I'm also privileged enough to be a six-time speaker at MoneroKon, which is really meaningful to me. But don't worry, everyone. This is my last talk. This is my fourth talk of the event, so you won't have to hear from me anymore. But if you're a fan of extrapolating, as this XKCD tells us to do, I'm so happy to announce by 2030, I'll be 100 of MoneroKon's projected 75 talks. So don't worry. Just wait till 2030, and I'll be on here all day, guys.

All right, to start out this talk, just another disclaimer, just like my last talk. I'm not a lawyer, nor am I a financial advisor. I'm not your lawyer, nor am I your financial advisor. And none of this is legal or financial advice. I'm not going to be held accountable for any of this. This really is just describing a code base I've been working on, and I make absolutely no further claims.

All right, so, Serai - I've been working on it еwo and a half years now, I want to say. It's a decentralized exchange, and it's aiming to just be an automatic robust platform that should work largely without human intervention. And the main goal of that is simply to prevent the next FTX. Now, when I started working on it two plus years ago, I wouldn't have said the next FTX, I would have picked another example, but 2024 - we're here to prevent the next FTX.

So yeah, at launch, it's going to be supporting Monero, Bitcoin, and Ethereum. And it uses its own network to order swaps. So when you want to do a swap, say you want to swap Monero for Bitcoin, you're going to send Monero, and the Serai network is going to record that event. It's going to say: "Hey, this Monero was sent to the Serai network. We want to trigger a swap with it". It's going to, on the Serai network, actually trigger the swap, determine the value out, and send Bitcoin out accordingly.

It also uses its own coin for routing and security. What that means is when you swap Monero to Bitcoin, you're actually swapping Monero-Serai-Bitcoin. That just kind of unifies all of the liquidity. It stops fragmented pools. You don't have to worry about: "Oh, well, I want to swap Bitcoin to USDT, NumberFive on this specific network. Is there liquidity?" Yeah, as long as both of the coins independently have liquidity, you'll be fine. You don't have to worry about any of the weird combinations you may get.

We also use it for security, our validator stakes Serai. And the part I'm really proud about, but has also made me very, very poor over these years - no pre-mine, no ICO, no dev fund, and no VCs. Thank you.

So I kind of just wanted to take it as a bit of a timeline, like what's going to happen, because hopefully Serai will be hitting its 1.0 release this year. That's a bit optimistic of me, but I'm finally going to be very public about saying that. And with that, I kind of wanted to let people know what we're going to be looking at when any network goes live and what that's going to be.

So how will Serai get started? There are going to be a set of genesis validators, trusted community members respected to be in that role, like Cake Wallet, led by the mighty Vik, who definitely didn't ask for an explicit shout out during this talk, is going to be one of those nodes. So hand to them when we have the time. We're also going to be, sorry, when the network launches, we have these genesis validators, users, that's hopefully you all, but no pressure. You'll just be able to provide Monero. Bitcoin, Ether, or DAI as liquidity. Those are the coins we're initially supporting at launch. If you want your favorite coin to be integrated, you're welcome to suggest it. I'm not personally taking more on before launch. We have to get to launch, guys.

But yeah, if you provide liquidity, you would get an airdrop of Serai, the native coin. At the time this airdrop occurs, that's going to be 100% of the distribution, because this is no pre-mine, no ICO, no dev fund, et cetera. The coins provided as liquidity in the matching airdropped Serai, these form the initial liquidity positions. Good time for me to clarify, Serai is not an order book exchange. It uses liquidity pools as popularized by Uniswap on Ethereum. So what this means is that users provide liquidity, they provide it in terms of both coins, say Monero and Serai, and then when a user wants to do a swap, it looks at how much Monero is in the pool and how much Serai is in the pool and it calculates a price based off the current ratio.

And then yeah, once we do this airdrop and we now have a bunch of liquidity in the pools, we start swaps. People will be able to swap from Monero to Bitcoin, vice versa in a decentralized fashion, which will be great.

Um, wow, apparently we jumped right into economic security. I thought this slide was a bit later. So the main question becomes, how do we secure this? It's this decentralized system. How do we stop 100 no-name anonymous accounts from joining and running off with all the Moneroes?

So Serai itself relies on economic security. Economic security is where our validators, whoever they are, stake more in value than the coins they secure. So because they're staking more, yeah, they could misbehave, but they are going to lose more than they could gain. So as long as their modeling holds, and because they're going to lose more than they stand to gain, they're really just stupid if they misbehave. I have to be honest.

Accordingly, when the network starts, 100% of our Serai was just airdropped to our lovely users, and no one has done any staking. And we have not reached this point where validators are staking more in value than they secure. So we refer to this time period as "pre-economic security". No one has staked yet. There is value on the network. We aren't economically secure just yet, yes.

So the goal of the network, and part of becoming this successful decentralized project, is to achieve economic security as soon as possible and actually get validators to participate in the network and stake Serai and create a successfully secure system.

So, pre-economic security. Anyone who wants to be a validator, contribute to decentralization, earn emissions from the network, they will just be able to swap any of the four coins we support directly to freshly minted Serai. So instead of swapping to Serai via the existing liquidity pools, which would really mess with the ratios and create some bad long-term effects, in my opinion, we will mint Serai directly to their staked position. They cannot just unstake this immediately and swap it into the pools. The stake is locked. It can only be unlocked into capacity in the economic security. We don't let validators unstake if we're threatening the health of the network. And since we're pre-economic security, technically the network's health is threatened until we achieve economic security.

So anyone will be able to swap to this freshly minted Serai, which can't just be swapped through the pools and actually does have to be staked to their validator. And this kind of just leaves us with surplus Bitcoin. If someone swaps in one Bitcoin and they get staked behind their validator, well, we freshly minted Serai. We didn't actually use that Bitcoin for anything. So now we just have one Bitcoin sitting there. And what do we do with that? We kind of have money, guys. Anyone have ideas?

So our solution to that was we formed protocol-owned liquidity. We take that one Bitcoin and we take half of it, so 0.5 Bitcoin, and we swap it to Serai via the existing pools. And now we have a balanced amount. We have half a Bitcoin and half a Bitcoin of value of Serai. And with that we can add liquidity back into the Serai protocol, which isn't owned by any user, but is owned by the protocol itself. Accordingly, it's not going to be removed, I mean, technically, it could be removed with some evolution of the protocol rule set, but that's not expected, blah, blah, blah. Basically, it's going to be liquidity there till the end of time. And since it's going to be there till the end of time, even if all of our users decide they no longer want to provide liquidity for whatever reason, the network itself will still have liquidity and will still be able to facilitate swaps. So it's just one of the things that makes it robust. And it's another way that the Serai network can ensure long-term standing.

With regards to user's liquidity, if you provide liquidity, you can remove that at any time. We're not here to, or I'm not here to trap you in anything. If you want to provide liquidity a month in, you're just not feeling the love, yeah, sure, remove your liquidity. That will forfeit the airdrops Serai. You do have to stick around for that, but if you just want to get whatever you contributed back out, yes, there's no lockup period. And during this time, validators earn emissions to their stake. But as I said, they cannot unstake because there is no capacity in the network's health for them to unstake into.

So eventually, all goes well. We get enough validators to stake Serai, and we become economically secure. This switches us over to post-economic security. And that's when the airdrop Serai starts to trickle feed. We're currently looking at trickle feeding it over a year. So let's say half a year in, we manage to reach economic security. No, we aren't just unlocking 50% of the Serai supply that any user can just suddenly remove and swap into the market. No, we'd be looking at trickle feeding 0.3% a day over a year just to ensure it's an overtime distribution and give people time to think about what they want to do, react, respond, so on and so on. And during this time, all of this time actually swaps up and going on, hopefully demonstrating that the Serai economic model is viable in the long term. We take those swap fees and they do go to liquidity providers.

Yet some swap fees are also used to burn Serai, which is important because, like Monero, we don't have a finite supply if we believe validators should be rewarded. So we do emit to validators. And with that, yes, we are an inflationary coin. But since we are burning some of our swap fees, we either will balance that out, achieve deflation given enough successful use, or we'll just ideally be mildly inflationary.

This is kind of my summary slide because I understand that might be a bit convoluted and I apologize if it got a bit too in-depth with exactly how the economics timeline of Serai is going to go. But if you're an end user and you're just like: what does all of this mean? You can swap Bitcoin to Monero, and vice versa, and Ether's also in there if you like Ether, in decentralized fashion. There's not me standing over the protocol. There's not five guys in some boardroom. It's a decentralized protocol made up of decentralized collection of nodes. If you have XMR, Bitcoin, or Ether sitting around, you can provide it as liquidity, earn some fees on it. And if you want to be more active, you can stakes arise a validator and contribute to that decentralization.

Any questions?
