# Mykola Siusko

_**Web3Privacy Now: Advocating for Privacy 24/7/365**_

_How does privacy advocacy work in crypto?_

_Web3Privacy Now core team will share a complex overview on:_
- _key challenges facing privacy advocacy_
- _broad range of market actors contributing to privacy_
- _share insights on how enthusiasts, projects, and ecosystem players could scale privacy advocacy & empower critical knowledge infra_
- _provide W3PN ecosystem outlook from privacy-focused community building to data-driven Explorer project scoring 600+ privacy services_

[https://youtu.be/Z4BDxfLoVGQ](https://youtu.be/Z4BDxfLoVGQ)

---

_**Николай:**_ First of all, I want to thank AGS for inviting me. I guess, small context: a week ago we made a privacy summit in Polis with many cool speakers, I don't know, from Hopper Tuning, Material Foundation, whatsoever. And we are highly aligned with the biggest privacy cost that Monero as a community and MoneroKon as the event activator is doing. And I hope this will be really fun because I think that sometimes we need to have a different type of sort of people in the community, different type of vibes.

But since the privacy is a sensitive topic, I would wanna start with this statement because that's a rare industry, where people keep chasing and saying, patronizing, what think you should do in life. And the last time I finished it in my school, when teachers were trying to tell me what kind of life I should live. And I think this is one of the biggest barriers why it's so harder for us to unite, why we can speak different languages, represent different genders, communities, and even belief systems.

I spent many years working for the advertising agencies, championing performance marketing, serving all these corporations you hate. And at a certain moment, I was pretty ashamed of my background. Because when you're inside the industry, it creates this magical feeling that we are changing the world, we are making something great. But then while the time passed by, you start to look around, you start to talk with people, and suddenly you know that things are not that cool, and you're not that young to be shined out by the new sneakers.

Then suddenly I went to, by chance, to the crypto market, like whatever you can imagine, starting from hackathons for oil companies, disrupting the IDs, fundraising, trying to send data across border from Ukraine to Poland, for example, working with a lot of corporations from Telefonica to LG, doing POCs in Dubai. And as you know, that since I'm Ukrainian, for me, revolutions look more like that, and not the ones who are spoken out by many youngish crypto people. And it raised a high level of bar of skepticism within the industry. And in my navigation of what to do, where to go, I bumped into the, I made a short stop within the COVID. And I think this is still needs to be processed by our community as well, how we collaborate remotely, how we talk with each other, how we execute projects together. And I think we're still neglecting the side that, for example, there are lots of messaging protocols here, or messages per se. And I was working for one of the companies last year and we managed everything in Matrix. And Matrix is terrible for the project management, but we need to talk about it super actively.

And then the war started. And it's interesting when people are saying about changing the world and you have this kind of like a big sort of mega narrative that comes into your house, lots of things doesn't make any sense anymore. Oh, we were disrupting creator economy before, we were changing the IP management. I don't really care anymore. And that's interesting because then you look around and you're receiving this message from actually former Logos guy who said: "Hey, we have vacancy, head of activism". And I was like: "Head of activism in crypto? What's that? Like what they want from us?" And then I bumped into Logos early manifesto. I was really interested how well made it was from an aesthetic point of view, how it's interesting was kind of like in terms of the activism for privacy, it's kind of like got me back to that sense that "hey, crypto suddenly and those communities make sense and we can really collaborate together". And since that time, like I'm a core at the Web3Privacy Now community, made lots of researches and even stopped for almost a year for Nym to check how the privacy projects look from inside. I needed money at that time. We run lots of events with many speakers I will talk later. And when you have this purpose and meaning and understanding that this is something that really could be helpful for not just the industry, for broader society, then everything starts to be kind of play super well.

And I will dedicate this talk on how we do stuff and what kind of tactics we apply to more privacy, let's say mainstream. I'm not ashamed of this word, because we want many people to become and taste cypherpunk spirit, because if it will be for chosen few, we will be in this smallish room having party together, we will be happy, but I guess to change the world, we need a bigger so-called anonymity set.

One thing we do is we penetrate existing hackathons. This is kind of a friend of ours who is into privacy by chance. And I named this chance Tornado Cash, because many people in Ethereum ecosystem suddenly explored privacy because of the trials. And it's interesting because for younger, these young people, maybe that's the first time they ever organized, they are not going out of the street, but they can do hackathons. And for us, what's important is not to patronize these people like: "Oh, you should have a Graphene OS on your device". But we should leverage and we could leverage what they have.

So what we've done, like I personally was judging the hackathons helping developers to build a really proper privacy tech and not for fun, let's say. And we also made the summit with many wonderful speakers. But for us it was also important to have these people on site. Jaromil is an old friend of Amir Taaki, old hacker who can really pass the knowledge of the previous generation. Arturo is really important guy on online censorship with the real products for 15 years. He's not into crypto, but he's willing to help come and share his knowledge. So we'd like to connect with those people. And Marius is kind of like super humble guy who is now doing radical archiving, helping communities, for example, document war crimes or police crimes. So we can imagine, for example, George Floyd video on distributed storages, incentivized and really censorship resistant. And that's what Marius is doing. But he's out of this big spectrum of fancy conferences. And for us, it's important to connect with those people because it's not just the crypto side, but it's also like activist side, free software side. And then we, as I said, bring it to the younger crowd that could be inspired, and then maybe they would explore other ecosystems like Monero.

Second thing that we see that in crypto, many people are still doing these posh hotels and really stupid locations. We kind of hate it, because we think that it distracts us from the meaningful places and for sort of humble one-on-one communication. So we go more like places like с-base, one of the first hacker houses in the world, with lots of long-standing, big, great portfolio of many meetups, meetings, organizing events that they've done, and we bring there a new crowd. We bring there people to connect with the more experienced hackers. We try to be this kind of like a bridge that connects different worlds.

And then what's important right now that many ecosystem across the crypto, they have aligned values, for example, is Monero. I really recommend to check Department of Decentralization within the Berlin. They tried to teach all those hackers who came two weeks ago in Berlin. I guess there were like four hundred, six hundred of them, that they should have proper values, that they should build the tools that are free and open source, and they should really care about the future of crypto in general. Not about this small bubble, and kind of respect that bigger decentralization narrative.

Also, it's important after Tornado Cash, we see a big frustration within developers. So what would we do? Would we go to jail? Amir doesn't want to go to jail. Why others should? And in that sense, we kind of like harness the moment to bring lots of the legal advisors like from Coin Center or Fatima from Swarm to talk about with developers what they should do within the open source, what should tactics would be when they do let's say anonymous engineering and we want to create this kind of like collaboration between usually super separated worlds.

Or for example, with the social cause, this interesting - yesterday I asked one of the participants, like: "Hey, what's Ukrainian crypto community is doing for Ukraine?" Oh, suddenly there's not much of organizing. And I'm always asking myself, like, why crypto is so late on social causes? And bringing some social causes on site, it's also creating an example how you could help others. For example, with Nym, because I worked there last year, I know that the head of growth of LATAM, he is incentivizing young people to code next to favelas in Brazil, or he helps young girls to run nodes in Ecuador. And these stories are quite inspiring, and it's great to see more diversity of locations getting into crypto, and also not just buying and selling, but also running nodes, educating others, going to universities, engaging youth.

And one last thing, I know that many projects keep fighting with each other, and we want to connect them, we want to stop this childish behavior of jealousy, what's privacy is better. And sometimes having a nice discussion together could lead to the prosperous collaboration.

There's also populism in the market. There's one example of Zama that fundraised 70 million or something. And as you can read, it's like a state of art. I'm pretty tired of these marketing messages because they keep distracting from the reality. And the reality is this - you cannot find any audit super easily on their website. That was my eye-opening from two years ago, and suddenly I understood that 95 plus percent of projects claiming that they deliver privacy never passed any third-party audit. Meaning also that they were never attested within their privacy features. Like for example, what kind of data they're collecting? Not necessarily on the privacy tooling realm, but on organizational realm. And also why, because those type of audits doesn't exist within the market.

So I tried to understand, and we made it on a GitHub, now we have kind of like, I guess the biggest database on who's doing, who's claiming that they do privacy. So, it's really useful for many research purposes when people try to navigate the decentralized identity realm, decentralized storage realm, who is doing privacy within DeFi. You can also track sunset projects. That's important for research-based things. Many projects shut down, like Incognito, one day and you cannot trace what's happened. So I think archival role is super important for the market because this also helps to understand who is doing what and get access to the knowledge information and collaboration faster.

This led to hackathon project that our team made the last ETHRome. The Czech people were drinking warm white wine and hacking that Explorer to basically understand what kind of enrich profile we should strip down per privacy project and then we can compare with each other. It basically it will look like that. It looks like that now. So we try to understand what privacy features we should track in a sense to check up if the project specifically is private or not, what's the technology that they've been used, what's the level of their privacy, if they're a testnet, they're not private, has they been ever audited or not, and stuff like that.

It also led to try to understand what kind of data could be machine readable, so we kind of create a standard for what privacy features or projects related features could be automated and then we can update them on the go. This will help to ship the data transparently and much more faster within the front end and also to check up within the moderation process on the backend and engage those community who are not many projects are generally faking privacy, but we want to force them to kind of give back for PRs on GitHub to attest if everyone audited them, if they're launch the mainnet if, I don't know, the new, they implemented something interesting within the ZK-stuff and things like that.

Also part of this project, what's important for us is like how we score these projects against each other. Because scoring here is a help. How the general scoring appeared in my head. I went to 50 projects and I was asking them from Railgun to Nym: "How I can test if you're private or not?" And the usual answer was: "Read the docs, read the code". I'm like: "I'm not technical. Reading the docs doesn't mean I would understand the docs. Reading the code doesn't mean that I would understand the code". So I was kind of lost and I was thinking: "Ok, I need some external help. And then I was going and asking from 50 then to 100 people, like give me sort of scoring, how you would test yourself". And I found out that there were 99 different answers. That was kind of interesting that even within the professional field, there's some sort of not synchronicity on the approach.

And we received this small grant from Material Foundation. We went to research on the scoring, both from non-techies and techies. Sometimes it's a bit naive, but it helps to filter out fake accounts. For example that are trying to say we have a GitHub and there's zero commits. Or they're trying to say: "Oh, we have a docs", but docs are marketing.

Then, sometimes we are thinking that within the media communication, privacy could be much more appealing, much more interesting to others. So the last year we ran some sort of: "Hey, let's define what's the best project of the year, who is the doxxer of the year. And let's go and ask from Amir to Harry from Nym to you, Juraj Bednar, their choices". Why this is important now, because what I think that since newcomers to this space, they don't know many things including free software ethics, they could follow example. If you would say: "Hey, this is my stack, you can use it". If Mario how well will share: "This is my stack, you can use it, I will help you", many people will start to install free software. They would use those VPNs that protects your privacy. And in that sense for us, it is important to be kind of like open and humble with them. There's a Pavol example, Amir example.

What's important also here, that we also emphasize the research that is happening within this sphere, because I think research could dodge that example that cryptos is scam, and to show that it's really innovative in terms of what's happening with ZK, FHE, TEE, and other fields. And if someone like Amir is saying like: "Hey, check that Nova IBC, and we provide a compelling link", many people from this sphere could just go and maybe create some products, projects, repos using a specific research or buy a Banana Phone. Why not?

And also it's kind of like a bit guerrilla mode on promoting the tech we like. And also to understand what's the pulse of the reality. It's a bit biased. We were asking quite close circles, but we tried to be really diversified within the ecosystems. And I was super surprised that people really rallied around Tornado Cash, while in reality, maybe there's nothing in common between them. And at the same time, it was fun, it was a member of Monero community who proposed: "We should have a doxxer of the year". And then people were saying really interesting examples around there.

Also, it's important that then people could track all the lists of the projects or research we're doing innovations, actually for research purposes to benchmark against each other, or maybe to grab something from the, for example, Bulletproof++ can be used within any ecosystem. It's not like Monero-centric. And in that sense, we can grab lots of inspiration and new good thoughts from so many different markets.

And within the hacktivism, for us, it's important to do mainstream stuff. Now we're kinda like, for example, here, 20 developers hacking, but we want hundreds of people to hack on privacy, maybe even thousands. So we were thinking like, how to help people hack much more consciously? And there's a guru from VAC who sits here, is his simplified UI. We are doing generator for ideas within the hackathons. So the hackers who don't know what to build, maybe they don't even understand the privacy specifics, for them, it will be much more, it's super useful to just click the button and get lots of inspiration and use cases.

And the next step here would be, like on the first, we aggregated lots of privacy related use cases and demos that you could access for GitHub. Then we went to people from Parasite, from the DarkFi, to Nym guys to aggregate their ideas, what is super crucial here and now, like for example, GitHub on IPFS and stuff like that. And then we shipped it back to community pretty soon. So maybe if you don't want to follow already pre-built stuff, you don't have to fork it, you can follow an idea from, I don't know, a Monero researcher who is saying: "We need those free tools that you can build now".

Also, we can fork sort of standard lean model canvas approach, but applied it to privacy. So people who kinda don't know how to ideate use cases, demos, or products within the privacy realm, they could have a simple framework to brainstorm what will be their next ideas for privacy. My favorite two slides from that long list is like at first people kind of could think about what data they're aggregating or protecting or leaking. Then again, have some sort of references or a threat actors they're protecting with and in that sense be much more conscious as developers. And on another hand, understand who are your threat actors. Like who is opposing except governments, who are threatening a certain use case. Maybe they're just scammers, and it's pretty easy to story tell privacy through protection from scammers, because this is quite common story that happens all over the world.

And we tested again in Berlin recently, many people were super surprised that suddenly their whole ideation process is structured, and then when they pitch those cases to jurists and hackathons, It makes much more sense.

And then we have this thing of, we think that there are too many stupid money in crypto that are just going to strange events, sponsorships and stuff like that. So we're kind of rewiring this moment. We are working annually with organizations within the partnerships. We share the same vision with Logos guys, with Jared vision on like aligning many complex tooling in the one big stack. And there are many other organizations like from Anoma to 0xbow who joined us. And we are happy that we are not poor and we are not going and like begging for donation, because many of you knows when you do open source and you do community-based donations, many projects are underfunded. They struggle with unsustainability. I would like from NimGas to talk about the economical sustainability of the complex ecosystems.

Then sometimes we are going to take money from foundations. For Zcash, I was interested specifically how crypto tooling could be applied to Russian-Ukrainian war, but for a bunch of diverse audiences from domestic violence survivors to people on the occupied territory, they could receive and need to receive crypto privately. And this will kind of like my personal project and actually it's originated by a talk in a bar when a guy approached me and said: "Hey, I donated privately crypto to the people in Kharkiv so they would buy SUV". And I told it to Zcash guys and like: "Oh, we need to hear more of those compelling, socially important, politically important stories".

And also we're collecting the nation seminar, it would be, it was, they make us happy because we see a support from people who are old hackers, who are researchers, cryptographers, who are supporting us. And also we see that there's a sort of unity, and we are not alone in that cause.

Also it's important within the privacy, I guess, to be kind of culturally fit and to look nice, because I guess it's a generational thing. I mean, Berlin is all black, but in the younger generation, they want to look cool. And I think that there could be this moment when we can talk about privacy within a fun realm, and we can really kind of like say that some people just need to live a better, happier life. And if we can make them happy within the strong Visual Voice and Visual Touch, so they will return to us, they will return to privacy. They were allocated those funds to the project that makes sense. This is actually from the Czech guy, Ljubos, who is a DJ. So he's hunting all those air drops, which for me is the capitalist nightmare. But he contributes to privacy and he contributes a lot and he is his cause. And he can sit on those two chairs at the same time.

And that's kind of like there will be some final slides here. We have, I don't know, now like 100 speakers, I guess, through all our events and lots of cool people from out there. We have lots of Git contributors, super-sporadical coming and going. Some people we need to kind of push a bit, like help us to aggregate the data about privacy market, while others are fixing bugs and constant problems with the backend and the frontend and stuff like that. And we want, lots of them are cool to be public, some of them don't want to be public. We also play this game nicely and respect personal privacy.

At the same time, what's important here that we give a space for different voices, from voices that maybe sometimes disagree between each other, culturally, politically, personally, because there's too many personality here within the privacy game. But at the same time, they can be at the stage. And for me, the last summit we made, not this year, the last year, I was saying: "Hey, let's bring your Worldcoin on stage and we have debate, like a Greek type of debate". And Rachel Rose was like: "No, no, no, no, world coin is bad, bad". I'm like: "No, no, you don't understand. We will bring Juraj, cypherpunk, you're a bad nut, we will put Ameen Soleimani from Privacy Pools and the world coin talented Czech developer, because those companies, they're capturing ultra exceptional talents that contribute to open source so hard and have a debate on stage". And that is much more productive than having Twitter fights because those people, they can talk through research, what's identity means, what's data collection means, what are the cypherpunk vision versus mainstream capitalist vision, and the audience in the room could really understand the subject much more complex, because when we fight in socials, we cut, cut, cut so many meaningful information that will make our products way better.

And just a few days ago, we were happy that the elder, like David Chum, the inventor of e-cash mixnets and many other things, is also eager to share knowledge with younger crowd, because for us it's important to also look back but not have this nostalgia moment, because sometimes I think that with cypherpunks we also looked in that moment of like: "Hey, what kind of life we lived 30 years ago? Cool". I'm like: "No, no, let's look at the future". And also having like value aligned MCs in a room that could really facilitate both elder generation and new generation of developers or wannabe hackers, it's really important for us.

And now we're like a big ecosystem that has like many multiple projects, almost 100 contributors in two years. Some projects are a bit lame, they're smallish. like privacy jobs, but suddenly people are finding jobs in the privacy market and they keep telling us like: "Hey, I had certain interviews with companies who are delivering privacy, and this helps me to not run away to DeFi, ReFi, whatever Fi is there and stay within the privacy and try to empower the industry".

And what's important for me that we should speak different voices. There shouldn't be one view on privacy. If someone is a cypherpunk and a DJ at the same time, whatever, like if you're, while you're contributing to GitHub, to events, to advocacy, to media, if you're giving jobs - perfect. But maybe our vision of privacy could be super different and that's happiness, I guess.

And I dedicate this talk to my friend because sometimes I think that what matters is not technology but people. You cannot solve social and human flaws and humans without just technology. It's just a bad architecture. But if we would understand how to connect with each other, how to help each other, oh, we can grow so much. And how we would engage others super differently.

That's our site. You can check everything there. And I hope that within what we do, we can unite with so many different people, and then bring them to privacy and then help them to go with a Monero path, Logos way, you name it, or Zcash way. But at a certain moment within the full stack privacy, they would have that VPN, they would have that messaging protocol, like SimpleX is there, or like RaffiNOS, or many other stuff. And those people need to collaborate and talk with each other.

Odd, I finished.
