# Pavol Luptak

_**Will New Rich & Powerful Libertarians & Cryptoanarchists Save the World from Dystopia**_

_As far as the political spectrum is concerned, the libertarians and (crypto)anarchists, who have believed in crypto as non-state money from the beginning, are currently the ones who are (and will be) the richest thanks._

_Rich people can change society the most thanks to capital._

_Does the fact that crypto is going to the moon mean that there will be many rich and influential libertarians (like never before) and society will become more free because of it?_

_Will the new rich and powerful libertarians and (crypto)anarchists save the world from dystopia?_

[https://youtu.be/d7SvTTR4Pxo](https://youtu.be/d7SvTTR4Pxo)

---

_**Pavol:**_ ...or out of the service. So many people have just switched to Monero, which is a big success for Monero. But I think that most rich crypto people will be like a bit converse.

And just the fact that you are rich doesn't mean that you are a super powerful, but it definitely means you are influential. So basically you have enough money to change the world. And what is quite interesting to say that at the same time, many people, especially "no-coiners", most population, I mean people who are still believing in a traditional democratic system, all these people will stay poor, because all these people, they will miss the "crypto train" and they will become victims of fiat inflation.

So at the same time as we should expect a lot of crypto aristocracy or Bitcoin aristocracy, we should expect that majority of population will be no-coiners plebs. Maybe this sounds like a bit elitist, I don't like it, but we should definitely expect new no-coiners plebs on the rise.

One important information is that all these poor people, victims of inflation or hyperinflation, all these people, they still have majority of democratic power. So they still can vote and can use the democratic power to change the system, because basically, the society in the future can be really polarized — there will be a lot of rich crypto people and significantly much more plebs like no-coiners. And because the political power will stay in the hands of these crypto plebs, they will lobby governments to change the system to survive in some way.

I think it's very likely that there will be introduced UBI, Universal Basic Income. Despite the fact that we can see that in many countries, it was tried in many countries like Canada, Finland, last time there was like a referendum in Switzerland, and all these countries, they rejected UBI. I think UBI will be introduced because it's quite likely that in the future a lot of people, they will not be unemployed, but they will be unemployable.

And what I think is that UBI will be introduced with CBDC, because the government will just ask: "Hey, do you want to receive every month extra money, like $1,000, $2,000 extra money just for doing nothing?" And most people will say: "Yes, of course". And the government will say: "Ok, but you know that it's possible to receive that only using CBDC, you can only receive our digital euro, you can receive only our digital dollars". So I think this will happen. I think that UBI probably will be introduced with CBDC or CBDC will be introduced together with UBI, because most people, of course, they will want extra money from the government just to survive. And of course, most people in that situation, they won't care that they will be completely spied and monitored by the government.

At the same time, we should expect that the government will lose their power in the virtual world, especially now because we have Monero, for example, which is truly anonymous cryptocurrency, and we should expect in the future that it will be more truly anonymous cryptotechnologies in the future. And so I think the government, despite the fact that they will lose power in this virtual world, they still will have really significant power in the physical world. And it means they will try to get as much as possible money and as much possible control from this physical world.

So expect, for example, property tax will be significantly increased. The highest one now is in Belgium. Also, we should expect introduction of wealth tax. So these are the countries where you can see all these orange and green countries, they have already introduced wealth tax. What does it mean "wealth tax"? Basically means when you have a lot of money in your bank account, you don't receive any interest from the bank account, but otherwise you are specially taxed just because you have a lot of money. Or if you own any kind of wealth, and the government knows about this wealth, you just pay extra money from this wealth. It is necessary to mention that also some canton in Switzerland, for example, they have already introduced this wealth tax. And it will be worse. Personally, I expect that all these blue countries, you can see there, in the future, they will also introduce a wealth tax, and they start to tax people based on their wealth.

Also, you should expect introduction of citizenship-based taxation, which is really evil, which basically means, for example, American citizens, citizens of Hungary, citizens, for example, of Kyrgyzstan, or citizens of Eritrea, you know, all these pink countries, these countries are basically tax slaves. What means it doesn't matter where these people move, just because they are citizens of these countries, they have to declare and pay taxes from their worldwide income. And it's quite likely that most countries, I mean these dark blue ones and light blue ones, they will also switch to citizenship-based taxation. At least in these days, the country like Australia and the UK are considering to switch to citizenship-based taxation. So basically, all people can become, or most people can become, tax slaves with no possibility to live.

We should be aware that to target crypto millionaires or this Bitcoin aristocracy, crypto aristocracy, governments will use multiple methods. So the way how they can find the information about crypto millionaires is either according to the KYC purchases. So in the past if you use centralized crypto exchanges, I hope not, I believe most of you are Monero users, and you don't use any KYC centralized crypto exchanges, but anyway, if you use them, not only crypto exchanges, but the governments can know how much crypto, how much Monero, how much Bitcoin you bought and you sold.

Also, they can find this information according to your crypto tax declaration. So if you live in the country where you have to pay taxes from crypto and you did some crypto tax declaration, of course, government knows exactly how much crypto you have. And you should be prepared that this government institution can be hacked, and all richest crypto people who declare their crypto can become victims of kidnappings of violence, of really bad things. So for example, personally I consider to be really, really dangerous to do any crypto tax declaration, and that's exactly what I started to be like a digital nomad. My tax residency is a territorial taxation country, so I don't pay any taxes from crypto and I don't need legally.

At the same time, the governments can target you according to the properties and visible wealth in the physical world. So when you buy anything on your name, they can immediately find out that you are a wealthy rich person.

And of course, if you buy a lot of things, if you have excessive consumption, and if you have an excessive carbon footprint, because at least, for example, in the Czech Republic and Slovakia, the banks already track your carbon footprint, so when you use your debit cards or credit cards, they exactly know your carbon footprint.

So it means that it is absolutely crucial for you to avoid all KYC purchases and use decentralized non-KYC exchanges like haveno.dex, which is basically something like Bisq, but based on Monero, interesting project. You should avoid crypto tax declaration. So I strongly recommend you to become a tax resident of territorial taxation. Or if you have to leave in any tax hell country, like a European Union country, you should live from crypto loans. You should try to stay as much as possible low profile. So if you want to buy any properties, you should buy these properties on some anonymous entities, companies. It's still possible. You shouldn't have any fiat in your bank account, just minimum to survive.

And I strongly recommend you to get second citizenship. You can get it by naturalization process or by investment. Now in Caribbean countries it's still possible to buy citizenship for $150,000. And from next month it will be double. So if you want to get like a good citizenship, you should try to do it as soon as possible. And you will need this second citizenship just because to have a new identity, which won't be associated with your banking or fiat history, for example. So they can find out where is your original country or original tax residency, or they can penalize you according to a carbon credit, which probably will be in the future associated with your citizenship.

The hunt for a high profile crypto people is already happening. You definitely know CZ, Binance founder, who was arrested. Roger Ver, "Bitcoin Jesus", also arrested. Ross Ulbrich was arrested many years ago. All these Bitcoin aristocracy people are already in jail. The question is who will be the next one?

What we should know is that in 2024 we have crypto wars like we had in the late of 90s. And this is crazy. We can see that the government arrested Roman Storm, Tornado Cash developer, then arrested people behind Samourai Wallet. Many other projects they got scared. So for example, my favorite project Incognito is going to be shut down. Also, Wasabi switched all the Coinjoin functionality. Many wallets, they left the US. And it'll be going worse. So especially, I think that's the main reason why now Monero is going up, because all these Bitcoin mixing service, they do not work anymore.

So very crucial question is: can this crypto millionaires gain power, like real power, before they're arrested in jail?

Fortunately, we still have a few examples where there are some individuals, powerful individuals, that are confronting with large states publicly. For example, Elon Musk. Elon Musk has a personal issue with the Brazilian government, because he refused to censor something with the Brazilian government wanted. Also, Apple, for example, won the case over FBI. Also, we can see that CZ from Binance, despite the money laundering of billions of dollars, he basically ended up just for four months in prison, what is basically nothing.

And everybody of you should be aware that sometimes in the future will become part of crypto aristocracy, even if you have just Monero or Bitcoin. And then it's very likely you will be a potential victim of physical attacks, kidnapping, extortion. And it's very likely that, like what is probably very normal and common in Mexico, you will need dedicated security services.

I expect in the future there will be a completely new industry to help these crypto millionaires to buy things in a physical or in an anonymous way, like real estate properties, companies. So all this crypto aristocracy can stay low profile. And most of these people, they also will buy or should buy multiple citizenship passports to have better legal protection.

One interesting thing you should be aware of, that crypto, especially Bitcoin or Monero, it doesn't matter, but decentralized crypto, is the historically the most powerful tool, because it transfers the existing society of the first party, which we call like a collective society, society when the collective, like a majority of people or the government, decides what should be paid will be transferred to individualistic society where it won't be possible to enforce taxation for example, and which basically will mean that individual can decide what it should be paid.

And many people can be: "Ok, I don't like this new kind of tyranny of individuals". So the question is: is the new tyranny of individuals something we should be feared? No, I don't think so. Because even now, like crypto people, Monero people, Bitcoin people, millions or less, all these people are socially aware people, and they are supporting all social projects they consider to be important.

And I would like to mention a project like a Pineapple Fund where some person just dedicated, distributed more than 5,000 Bitcoins to 60 charities. Also another interesting project is the Giving Block where more than 170 millions of dollars were in crypto was distributed to multiple charities. Also another projects like BitGive or UNICEF Cryptocurrency Fund.

Maybe interesting question is when will these new crypto aristocracy survive? And the answer is pretty simple. When crypto people will be enough rich or they will have enough resources to lobby politicians in this authoritative government system to favor their interests over no-coiners voters. Because if you know, each politician basically is trying to follow the interests of his sponsors, of his supporters, and secondary or thirdly, wishes of his voters, for example.

It's very likely that big countries like European Union countries, the US, will be really against crypto aristocracy. So we should expect there will be new countries, maybe Caribbean countries, which will be Bitcoin friendly. Even now we have super Bitcoin friendly countries like El Salvador or Georgia. So it's quite likely that in the future, a lot of these people, they will move to these countries. And it's quite likely that countries like European Union countries and the US, which basically will fire all these rich crypto aristocracy, and they will be anti-Bitcoin, they won't survive from the longer perspective. And of course, this Bitcoin-friendly country or crypto-friendly countries, they will survive because this crypto aristocracy will bring them real money, real non-inflationary money.

Many of you probably can say: "Hey, I don't like come back to these aristocratic times". But I would like to say it's not necessarily bad things. For example, we have the 10 richest countries in the world: Qatar, United Arabic Emirates and Brunei, And these countries have the highest GDP per capita. Maybe you can say that, for example, UAE, like Dubai has a lot of money from oil, but unfortunately it's not true. Only 1% of GDP of Dubai is from oil. The most is just from doing business and tourism.

The question is that if you have a new crypto aristocratic countries: will these countries have enough or will provide these countries enough personal freedom to stay and to live in these countries? I strongly recommend you to read the book from Hans-Hermann Hoppe, it's called "Democracy, The God That Failed", where it's like a really detailed rational explanation why monarchy or most monarchy are economically better system or better functional system than any democracy.

One of the biggest threat to crypto itself is CBDC. You should be aware that the central banks are trying to introduce CBDC as soon as possible, because if they don't do that in the following years, and the most population will switch to crypto, to Lightning, Monero or any cryptocurrency, in the future nobody will need fiat money, nobody will need central banks, and it will cause like a collapse of central banking system. And the collapse of the central banking system can mean collapse of the traditional nation states. So if the current nation states want to survive, they need to have central banking. They need to have the control over issuing their money. And then the only way how they can do that in this century is just to introduce their own digital currency. So you should perceive CBDC as a survival fight of the current state.

So just summary of what I said till now. What should I do if I want to survive in this new dystopian world? Definitely I recommend you to avoid any KYC. So don't buy any crypto the state knows about. Try to avoid any tax declaration in a legal way. So it basically means change your tax residency, for example to Paraguay or Panama, Uruguay, any good country. Or if you have to live majority of your time, for example, in tax hell, for example, European Union countries, you have to live from loan, from crypto loan. So use system like a Farfish, use system like a AAVE or MakerDAO or something like that, just to be able to not to trigger tax even and be able to survive. Try to avoid potential citizenship based taxation, citizenship based military service, citizenship based carbon footprint, and to think how you can achieve it, just get a second citizenship. I strongly recommend you also to switch to a parallel world or parallel society, disconnect from the current system as much as possible. For example, me personally, I don't have residency or any tax residency in your opinion. I'm the resident of Paraguay and Panama. I don't use any European company. So I'm trying also to stay low profile. I use many anonymous entities to own.

And my last and the most important recommendation: stay safe, because it's very likely you will be a crypto millionaire too. The question is just when.

That's all. Thank you a lot.
