# Ryan

_**Monerica - A Directory for a Monero Circular Economy**_

_Monero is the ideal cryptocurrency for building out circular and parallel economies which allow one to transact without a bank account or government ID. Monerica (monerica.com) was created to answer the most important question one should ask about a cryptocurrency: what can I do with it? A discussion of Monerica can address why Monero is the best for real economic activity in a digital world, how one can practically live off Monero, and what attention this project has received since its inception in January 2022._

[https://youtu.be/Vb00xFTyu9c](https://youtu.be/Vb00xFTyu9c)

---

_**Ryan:**_ Welcome to Monerica. I am Ryan, I am the creator and founder of Monerica, and it's a directory for a Monero circular economy.

So I'm gonna go through what Monerica is in a little more detail, what a circular economy is using Monero, different reasons to use Monero for economic activity, some tax and accounting issues you may face, how you can live off Monero today, different mentions of Monerica and online media, advertising, and also how you can start your own Monero-related business.

And so Monerica is website monerica.com, and I started it at the beginning of 2022, and it's a global directory of the legal businesses in Monero and also different tools and utilities like wallets and things like that. And it simply answers the question of what can you do with Monero is tired of people asking what can you do with this? So I went through and aggregate all the different things you could do. And different businesses, all kinds of businesses, exchanges, resources, there's also nonprofits like "Crypto for the Homeless", different causes, but not political causes, just more humanitarian.

And importantly, it helps Monero users, it tries to help Monero users know what's a legit site and not. So if there's a site that someone has used that they say they're a customer of, it can be verified. If it's something that someone says is a scam, I don't want other people to fall for that kind of scam, so it can be identified that way. And there's an audit history of each of the entries, so you can see if it was ever flagged or there was some kind of bad comment about it. The code that runs it is open sourced on GitHub, and it's written in C sharp, SQL, HTML, CSS and there's no JavaScript on it.

And a Monero circular economy is a way to earn, spend, and save in Monero. So you don't have to go to and from different currencies and incur all these different kinds of fees that are implicit in that process. And by participating in a Monero circular economy you contribute to making the protocol better and the tooling better. So if people want to… what's the justification for improving Monero protocol if no one is going to use it? So this is a way to just further enhance it. The more people that use it, the more justification there is to start new companies, the more reason there is to improve the protocol and make it better. And it's basically using Monero as is. Obviously there's many upgrades that can happen to Monero, and probably there will always be some, but it's not about getting lost in all the tech talk. It's about using what's available today.

And why would you want to use Monero for any economic activity? Well, of course, you have self-custody of your funds, and that's obviously important so that it can't be taken from you. The transaction costs are low, so it's much easier to justify using it, like if you're taking payments as a business like an online business like with Stripe or PayPal, like they'll take like 3 % and a transaction fee. So having Monero, it's much easier to not be subjected to that.

Also, you have access to the money faster, the faster settlement. So having the ability to have the funds settled in 20 minutes is much better than having it settled in three to four days where the bank is lending your money and earning interest on it. They could send it to you quickly, they're not going to. They don't have a real incentive to because there's not as much competition. So fast settlement is important, so that there's a higher velocity of money and people can receive it and start spending it very quickly. And this is across all borders. Obviously, if you're using PayPal or something like that, it could take even longer than three or four days to get your money settled into your bank.

And unlike Bitcoin, Monero has perpetual block reward, tail emission, and it provides some justification for using it beyond just savings. It encourages spending to happen. And I think that's important. Obviously, all crypto is approaching the economy from different angles. But I think one of the values with Monero is the idea that you want to use it.

And different things that you will try to sell or vendors that I see selling and a lot of like payment processors, you're going to price things in fiat currency, generally speaking, just for your own accounting reasons to know if your business is profitable or not. So when a business tries to sell something for Monero, they're generally getting a market rate that expires at some point in time, and they can price things in dollars or euros, or yen or whatever they want. And you should consult a crypto tax professional that accepts Monero. There is one that accepts Monero. He's happy to take your business. He's received business because of Monero, in Monero because of Monerica. And what's required for your specific jurisdiction is something you'll have to assess for your own specific needs.

To have a full circular economy, you should advocate for Monero to be integrated into the state so that you can actually pay your taxes and it can be a legal tender and it's not considered a property. And over time, this is possible. I mean, in the state of Colorado, you can pay your state income taxes with Bitcoin already. So as much as it might seem like a crazy idea, governments are already allowing this. So things start at a state level, and they can eventually go to the federal level. So it is possible. And if nothing else, you could just convert it to Bitcoin and pay that way in those situations.

So living off Monero, think that's something that is the end goal of Monero itself. So there's many layers to this. The most practical are prepaid virtual cards, or you can get physical cards as well. And these can be added to Apple Pay or Google Pay for in-person transactions. And you can chain these cards together. So like in America, if you go to like a grocery store, they allow you to use multiple forms of payment. So you could have like $1 left on a gift card or a prepaid card, and then you can do the next remaining balance with a second card and the next remaining balance with a third card and so on. And this is just a very practical way to use Monero in real life by having these kinds of cards. And it's easy to do it this way because if you're in another country and you lose your credit card and you're not gonna be able to get it issued to you, then one option is to, if you have Monero, you can go through some of these different services and sites that allow you to buy one of these cards and use it that way. And in addition to these prepaid cards, there's also gift cards. So instead of buying basically a gift a card that can be used at any Apple Pay terminal, if you just shop specifically at certain merchants, you can use them that way. So Uber, credit you can add to Uber Travel, Amazon, grocery stores, like there's big stores like Kroger, they have gift cards that can buy with Monero. There's really lots of different ones and they are like nation specific. So those are concerns you may have, but you can buy them that way.

In addition, another level is shopping proxies. If you want to buy something on Amazon, for example, there are companies on Monerica that will help you buy things on Amazon. You can give them a cart worth of things you want to buy, and you can buy those things on Amazon that way. They can deliver it to your home, or they can deliver it to a locker. So in addition being able to use Monero in that way you prevent Amazon from having your data. If you have an address that you can have things delivered to, you can also buy food and drink related products there. You can have like coffee or there's a marketplace in Europe that you can get all kinds of different like meat and cheese delivered that you can have that way. Clothing there are clothing companies. Yeah, there are Monero merchandise, of course, but there's other clothing and apparel technology stuff you can get laptops and phones and there are marketplaces with like a million products on them already that accept Monero that you can use. So I personally receive income from advertising revenue from Monerica and I've been able to eat pretty much all of my groceries this whole year with Monero. I mean, it's possible.

Monerica has, because it's become the resource for every business and every business that's accepting Monero, it's pretty much on there at this point. It's gained some attention in the Monero community and on shows like Monero Talk and Monerotopia, and at conferences. Monerica was a partner for Finney Forum and Monero Matteo has said very positive things about Monerica as being a very important site. He's an accountant on the directory. And there was a whole video about Monerica on Mental Outlaw YouTube channel. And this channel has about 600,000 subscribers. That video's had about 85,000 views on it. And he's also made reference to using Monero as well. He has a market of his own. He's very much on board with this and advocating to this to a greater population of people. And through different SEO related tools that I have, I can see different blogs and forums that have commented and referenced and linked to Monerica. And the trend is pretty much people throughout the internet answering the question for other people that I'm trying to answer, what can you do with Monero? And they link to Monerica.

And advertising is how Monerica exists as a business. And one of the problems it solves. So crypto companies do struggle to reach their customers because Facebook, Google, Twitter, all these gigantic tech companies, they don't like crypto companies. They make it difficult to advertise. And so how are small businesses on Monerica going to be able to reach any new customers when every door is locked and there's nothing you can do. Well, you can advertise on Monerica and there are spots for subcategory advertising and at the top of the page. And this is how you can grow your business. And that's one thing that people have told me. One of the hardest things with having a business in crypto or accepting Monero is getting new customers. So I'm trying to help. You have a free listing and then you can pay to have more promotion on your, on your listing. And some of the advertisers that are currently, consistent categories are like instant exchanges, prepaid cards, gift cards, proxies to buy things on Amazon, VPN companies, web hosting companies. These are all profitable businesses that are spending money on advertising on Monerica.

And so I want to encourage everyone to make a business that accepts Monero. If you have an existing online business that you want to grow, you can use different e-commerce plugins like for WordPress. It's not just the business listings, it also shows you all these different merchant services, and you can integrate it with your existing platforms with relatively low friction, or you can just start a whole new business. And there is an accountant, and there are legal professionals on Monerica that can help you. There are marketing companies, there are design agencies, they can help you make a logo, they can help you make a website. You can find programmers, you can find different services. There are proxies for postage, you can do printing. There's really enough resources at this point to be able to bootstrap an entire business in Monero and also web hosting, domain registration. And, yeah, my goal is to encourage everyone to make a business. And if you're not gonna do that, then just remember one thing: just use Monero!

And if you want to go to the site or submit a listing or revise a listing or say that there's something that people should or shouldn't use, that you've used, then you can go and find a listing and submit a revision and an edit. You can contact Monerica through email or you can follow on Twitter when there are new listings. I try to post those. And then the code base itself or other features or different parts of it that can be improved.

And now if you have any questions, we're happy to answer.
